[Amit Varma]: When we think of geopolitics, when we look at our neighbourhood, it's natural to first
[Amit Varma]: think of Pakistan. India and Pakistan have been in conflict since these nation states
[Amit Varma]: existed. It may be a hard conflict to resolve. It may even be an impossible conflict to resolve.
[Amit Varma]: But it is a conflict we understand. We get the motivations on either side. We know where
[Amit Varma]: the roots of this conflict lie. We know both the what and the why. We also know the limits
[Amit Varma]: of our engagement. But we know none of this about our relationship with China. Are India
[Amit Varma]: and China friends or enemies? Are we engaged more in combat or more in cooperation? Do
[Amit Varma]: the two sides look at this as a zero-sum game or a positive-sum game, a win-win situation?
[Amit Varma]: What do the Chinese want from us? What do we want from them? Do we even know what we
[Amit Varma]: want from them? These are important questions to understand, especially because China is
[Amit Varma]: way more powerful than us in every possible sense. And while there was relative peace
[Amit Varma]: between India and China in the decades since the 1962 war, things have been heating up
[Amit Varma]: in the last few years. This is a problem. And before we solve it, we have to understand
[Unknown]: it.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. My guest today is a remarkable scholar, Kanthi Bajpai,
[Amit Varma]: whose new book is called India vs China, Why They Are Not Friends. I've done many episodes
[Amit Varma]: on China before, including a deep dive into the history of our interactions. So when I
[Amit Varma]: first started reading Kanthi's book, I didn't imagine I would find much that was new in
[Amit Varma]: it. But I did. This lucid and insightful book does the one thing that I enjoy in nonfiction
[Amit Varma]: books. It gets meta. Specifically, this book builds a frame through which we can examine
[Amit Varma]: the India-China relationship. It's built around what he terms the four P's, perception,
[Amit Varma]: perimeters, partnerships and power. If you find China to be a bit of a mystery and don't
[Amit Varma]: quite understand the contours of this conflict, then this book is for you. But Kanthi and
[Amit Varma]: I don't only talk about the book. I love delving into the personal and intellectual
[Amit Varma]: journey of my guests. And Kanthi had tons of insight for me about academia, being a
[Amit Varma]: public intellectual, how one learns, why it is important to forget the inessential, how
[Amit Varma]: writing and teaching make you a better thinker, and so on. There's tons of dope in this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get to it, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first
[Amit Varma]: heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009 and
[Amit Varma]: became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me, and I feel I
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced
[Amit Varma]: to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well,
[Amit Varma]: that phase in my life ended for various reasons, and now it is time to revive it. Only now,
[Amit Varma]: I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of
[Amit Varma]: the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land
[Amit Varma]: up in your email inbox. You don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Kanti, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you very much. It's great to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm honored to have you here. And also, like I start my episodes, generally delving
[Amit Varma]: deeper into, you know, a person's journey right from where they went to school, which
[Amit Varma]: in your case is interesting, because you ended up becoming a headmaster for you went to school.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, before I go back into the distant past, how have the last few months been for
[Amit Varma]: you? Like Singapore's been on a sort of a trajectory of its own. And right now, it seems
[Amit Varma]: to have coped with it really well compared to many others. And, you know, there was this
[Amit Varma]: recent announcement by the Singapore government that hey, we're just going to treat this as
[Amit Varma]: endemic after a certain point in time and and not do contact tracing and quarantine
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. But quite apart from that aspect of it personally, how has this time
[Amit Varma]: been for you where you can't go out so much and you teach and I guess you can't talk to
[Amit Varma]: students so much. You can't interact physically with other scholars, you've actually written
[Amit Varma]: a book during this period, in some kind of isolation, I'm guessing. What has it been
[Guest]: like?
[Guest]: Well, actually, I mean, I'm glad you asked that because I think this book would never
[Guest]: have got written if I hadn't had the lockdown or semi lockdown. And the fact that it came
[Guest]: along at a certain time, and coincidentally, juggernaut books approach me to write the
[Guest]: book. I'm quite disciplined. But I think if I don't get a smart kick in the pants and
[Guest]: in an environment where there's pressure on me, very long pieces of writing, I tend to
[Guest]: start bracketing them and putting them aside. I write a lot of chapters and books and try
[Guest]: and publish in journals. But those are, you know, fairly short pieces. This was supposed
[Guest]: to be 50,000 words, and it ballooned in my hands to about 75,000 words. And I think juggernaut
[Guest]: got quite nervy about the whole thing. But I think I needed the discipline or the semi
[Guest]: lockdown environment, where we weren't completely stopped from moving out. By July of last year,
[Guest]: when I began this, we could go to restaurants, there was hybrid teaching, I could go out
[Guest]: shopping and so on, so forth, and under certain conditions, even see a movie. But in fact,
[Guest]: it became quite complex to do all of that and rather artificial and sometimes stressful,
[Guest]: because you're worried about being infected. Oddly enough, ironically, the COVID contributed
[Guest]: to my staying parked at home within these four walls in a small study and banging the
[Guest]: book out. So I'd say, you know, the kind of collateral of it for me was that it concentrated
[Guest]: the mind wonderfully. And I just banged out the book in three months. I have a bit of
[Guest]: a library. You know, my kids always say, you buy so many books, what do you do with all
[Guest]: of them, dad? And partly, I mean, I do read all of them. But I bank them, I bank them
[Guest]: for when I will need to reach for that volume, when I need to check a fact or a perspective.
[Guest]: And of course, the internet rides to your rescue. So even though I couldn't get to the
[Guest]: library and discuss things with colleagues all that much on the book, I could always
[Guest]: turn to Professor Google, who had lots of information and ideas for me. And so that's
[Amit Varma]: how the book got written, really.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, we'll take a digression here before we go to your history and talk about
[Amit Varma]: the act of writing and researching because, you know, when I picked up this book of yours,
[Amit Varma]: which by the way, I love reading, so enlightening, and so lucidly written, you know, when I picked
[Amit Varma]: it up, my assumption was I haven't read anything else by you except maybe columns here and
[Amit Varma]: there. But then I realized that one of your earlier books, The Roots of Terrorism, which
[Amit Varma]: I think you wrote in the early 2000s, I had actually read that while researching for a
[Amit Varma]: review I wrote of Alan Kruger's book on what makes a terrorist. And I realized that I did
[Amit Varma]: not remember anything of your book, or in fact of Kruger's book. And also, I have done
[Amit Varma]: a number of episodes on China in the past. And I realized that while reading your book
[Amit Varma]: and taking notes and all of that, that there was very little I remembered of them either.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something I find as I'm coming into middle age that, you know, one may read
[Amit Varma]: a lot and one may try to absorb a lot of knowledge, but it's one you forget. And obviously, by
[Amit Varma]: osmosis, you know, some, you know, the frame of how you think about things and the way
[Amit Varma]: you look at the world might be affected by osmosis in ways you don't consciously realize,
[Amit Varma]: but nevertheless, you forget so much, you lose so much. So in your case, you know, do
[Amit Varma]: you have any ways of, for example, doing knowledge management, trying to, you know, make sure
[Amit Varma]: you assimilate all the information that you take in all the books that you read? Tell
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit about, you know, how you do your knowledge management. And after that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we can discuss how you go about writing a book.
[Guest]: Actually, you know, you made an important point, which you phrased a bit pejoratively,
[Guest]: in the sense that you said, well, you know, I tend to forget, but actually forgetting
[Guest]: is a rather important way of managing knowledge. I think the brain partly automatically does
[Guest]: that. If it's not terribly telling stuff, your brain edits it out. It doesn't stay in
[Guest]: long term memory. And that's useful, because otherwise, you would be filled with all kinds
[Guest]: of stuff that you really don't need. And what you do, the space you need to process more
[Guest]: recent readings and knowledge would kind of degrade or be compromised. So I think a good
[Guest]: part of knowledge management, in fact, is creative or periodic forgetting. And so I'm
[Guest]: quite comfortable with that. I mean, I think partly, I just feel if I need something, which
[Guest]: has now disappeared from my memory banks, I'll just reach for the book or go back to
[Guest]: the computer. The other strategy, of course, is that I think periodically, as I read, I
[Guest]: do kind of do a tick mark to myself mentally, which is to say, what is the value add of
[Guest]: this? I mean, does it just reinforce stuff that I already know pretty well, in which
[Guest]: case it's dismissible, forgettable. But if it offers something that's somewhat different,
[Guest]: then I think I tick it off in my brain. And at least it stays as a kind of gestalt, you
[Guest]: know, a kind of a quick picture or an image that remains in my brain of a value add that
[Guest]: came from a book. I mean, take an example in my field, and it's referenced in the book.
[Guest]: You read so much, but recently, 10 years ago, let's say, I think we all encountered Joseph
[Guest]: Nye, the Harvard political scientist's idea of soft power. And I mean, I don't bother
[Guest]: to remember every argument he made about soft power. But basically, the concept of soft
[Guest]: power, how it differed from other forms of power remained, and I just tick marked it.
[Guest]: Didn't make much use of it, to be honest, until it came to this book. And so I had one
[Guest]: of his books. I refreshed my memory quickly on some of the details related to it. And
[Guest]: I think that's how I manage it. I try to consciously tick mark a value add without stressing myself
[Guest]: about remaining every twist and turn in the tale. And I think that's probably what happened
[Guest]: with you with my earlier book, which you probably said, hmm, something here, but I'm not sure
[Guest]: it really necessarily advances the cause tremendously. And I think your brain quite rightly just ticked
[Guest]: it off as something that you wouldn't really need to preserve. And to be honest, I'm not
[Guest]: sure I could summarize that book any longer very well either. All the bits and pieces
[Guest]: of it are now seeping back in now that you mentioned it.
[Amit Varma]: I think you're being too harsh on your book and too kind on my brain, because I tend to
[Amit Varma]: forget too much. I came across a really nice cartoon a couple of days ago where a man is
[Amit Varma]: basically asking his wife, hey, what's the password to our computer? And she says, it's
[Amit Varma]: our anniversary. And, you know, so he's forced to remember it. So I think a lot of wives,
[Amit Varma]: including perhaps mine, listening to this will will be like, oh, that's why he forgets.
[Amit Varma]: It's not important. But do you use any technology or stuff for taking notes and all of that?
[Amit Varma]: Like earlier, what I would do is I would take copious notes in Microsoft Word, for example,
[Amit Varma]: when researching for an episode or something I was writing, but it would just be a long
[Amit Varma]: linear collation of text. And now I use something called Rome Research, which, you know, has
[Amit Varma]: nested entries, bi-directional linking, it becomes much easier to kind of categorize
[Amit Varma]: and search for keywords within everything that you've ever done, and all of that. So
[Amit Varma]: do you feel that there is a need for that? Or do you feel that no, you know, whenever
[Amit Varma]: you get down to writing something, you kind of broadly know that, oh, I need to read this
[Guest]: and this and this, and then you go and do that? Yeah, I'm the old fashioned kind. So
[Guest]: and I'm a hypocrite lector. I mean, I tell my students, please use technology, please
[Guest]: be very assiduous about taking notes when I'm speaking or others are speaking when you
[Guest]: read and all of that. But myself, I'm I'm a hopeless note taker. I either slavishly
[Guest]: write down every single thing that somebody says, or that I've underlined when I first
[Guest]: scan a book or a piece of writing, and I can't see the woods for the trees, or I'm so lazy
[Guest]: that I just give up completely and hope that if it's interesting enough, stuff will stay
[Guest]: in my brain, as I said earlier, as a kind of gestalt, an image, or that little bits
[Guest]: and pieces will remain, and I'll go back to the source when I need it, like you say, when
[Guest]: I need it, I'll go back to the source, take notes. Even then, I'm a pen and paper kind
[Guest]: of guy. And so I will just yank out my little pad and pen and take horrible scribbly notes.
[Guest]: And in fact, technology has undermined me, because I've got so used to working on a keyboard
[Guest]: now that I can hardly, you know, handwrite anymore. And often when I do my notes, I can't
[Guest]: even I can't make sense of my own notes. So I go along as I write, I have a broad sense
[Guest]: of where I'm going. And I write quite sort of ambitiously, I make assertions. And then
[Guest]: I start to go back and look at whether the evidence really bears out what I'm saying,
[Guest]: and do I need to modify it?
[Amit Varma]: You made an aside, and I'll make an aside based on that. And your side was that technology
[Amit Varma]: is kind of undermined your habit of taking handwritten notes, and so on. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I teach an online writing course. And after one of the webinars of that recently, one
[Amit Varma]: of the participants asked me an interesting question, which got me to thinking because
[Amit Varma]: I hadn't really thought about it. And her question was that, is what you write different?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it shaped by whether you are typing it on a keyboard and, you know, actually handwriting
[Amit Varma]: it by pen? And at one level, obviously, the answer is no, because words are words. And
[Amit Varma]: I've always held that, you know, for me, for example, a book is a words and author writes
[Amit Varma]: everything else is packaging. So whether I'm holding a physical book or a Kindle, the words
[Amit Varma]: are words. But on the other hand, if you you know, look at the way that you write like
[Amit Varma]: there are some people, there'll be videos on YouTube about how you can type as fast
[Amit Varma]: as you think. And the act of writing physically on paper is much slower. And therefore, you
[Amit Varma]: would imagine that your thinking also has to slow down to match the pace of your writing
[Amit Varma]: when you're writing by hand. And that may change the form of your thinking. Now, I don't
[Amit Varma]: know in what way and I'm kind of thinking aloud, you know, maybe it brings some kind
[Amit Varma]: of tear off to your thinking and helps it maybe it harms it because you're not, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you're going along slower than you would. But since you just mentioned your habit of
[Amit Varma]: writing by hand and how technology has undermined it, I thought I'd bring it up and see if you
[Guest]: have any thoughts.
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, I've gone through a strange, although perhaps others have as well, but
[Guest]: a strange kind of transition. I began by saying what most people say, I guess of my generation
[Guest]: or somewhat younger, which is that I could only compose by writing log hand with pen
[Guest]: and paper. And then I used to type it in the old days when there were typewriters, I couldn't
[Guest]: compose in a typewriter. And when computers came, again, I wrote longhand. I remember
[Guest]: most of my PhD initially was written by longhand back in the 80s. And then I tapped it all
[Guest]: out on a computer. And I just couldn't think and compose properly unless I did longhand.
[Guest]: Now I've got to the point where it's the reverse. I really can't do the handwriting. I can take
[Guest]: notes handwriting. I can't really take notes typing stuff out, but I can only take notes
[Guest]: handwritten. On the other hand, I can't now compose coherent text handwriting. My arm
[Guest]: hurts, it gets squiggly. And I like now the white screen or the slightly yellow screen.
[Guest]: I like the clickety-click of the keyboard. I bought one of those clackety old-fashioned
[Guest]: keyboards, which are now newfangled keyboards, because I like the clickety-click and the
[Guest]: pushback from the keys. So there was something tactile and noisy that I need now as a feedback
[Guest]: or as a feeling when I compose. And I must say, so it's reversed for me. I do much better
[Guest]: when I type out the text originally, and then just use handwritten notes as a supplement.
[Guest]: So that's where I am.
[Amit Varma]: And you've written so many books, you're a prolific columnist and essayist and so on.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you mentioned the white screen, which often to me is like the white screen
[Amit Varma]: of death, because so often I will, you know, sit down to write and it'll just be a struggle
[Amit Varma]: and that clickety-clack of the keyboards, which you mentioned, is what I aspire to.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm just sitting there and there's a white screen. And obviously, there are, you know,
[Amit Varma]: various hacks, writers have to beat this. And I myself, when I teach my writing course,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps a little hypocritically, because I don't know my own struggles so well, I tell
[Amit Varma]: them about how, you know, most of the act of writing is just getting your butt on the
[Amit Varma]: chair and just actually getting the work done. Tell me a little bit about your working habits,
[Amit Varma]: because you know, when one writes, initially, I guess, there are, one has to deal with the
[Amit Varma]: anxieties of what other people will think of your writing. And when you're a young scholar,
[Amit Varma]: you want to impress others, and you have to get past that, and that can sometimes come
[Amit Varma]: in the way. Later on, you have to handle things like the curse of knowledge, where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you know so much that you assume that is, you know, is this even worth writing about?
[Amit Varma]: Surely everybody knows it? Am I stating the obvious? You know, which I would imagine will
[Amit Varma]: happen to anyone in any field when they are so deep into it, that everything seems common
[Amit Varma]: knowledge to them. So what's kind of your work ethic like? What are the problems you
[Amit Varma]: have faced in your writing life? Like if one looks at your body of work, it's incredibly
[Amit Varma]: impressive and one imagines that, oh, Mr. Bajpai just sits down and he just hammers
[Amit Varma]: out book after book. But that's never the case, right? So tell me about the kind of
[Amit Varma]: problems you faced, how you overcome them, and what your work ethic is like, like writing
[Amit Varma]: this book, for example, during the pandemic, you knocked it off in three months, you've,
[Amit Varma]: I think you mentioned that in, you know, in your episode with Milan Vaishnav on Grand
[Amit Varma]: Tamasha, which I'll link from the show notes. So, you know, is that kind of your normal
[Amit Varma]: process? Or is the normal process a little more drawn out and stuff?
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, I think that I need to get going quickly. And if I postpone writing too
[Guest]: much, if I think it over to too much, then it slows me down, it paralyzes me a bit. I
[Guest]: think when I was an undergraduate in Canada, and, and a bit thereafter, I had this kind
[Guest]: of sense that you really have to develop a full outline, fill in the subsectors of virtually
[Guest]: every section. And then when you've got a grand scheme set up almost on a board in front
[Guest]: of you with connective sort of lines and vectors, and got it all figured out, that's when you
[Guest]: really get going. And you write very carefully, very systematically proceeding from A to B
[Guest]: and end up at Z. And I think as an undergrad, in one paper, I remember, particularly in
[Guest]: my English literature class, urged on by a friend of mine, a girlfriend of mine at the
[Guest]: time, I tried to follow that I got the most miserable grade I ever got. And I just had
[Guest]: a kind of moment there where I realized that I don't work that way, I have to kind of get
[Guest]: into it and then amend and edit and change. And, and the faster I get to it, the more
[Guest]: likely I'm to do something a bit more original, and actually finish it and, and probably do
[Guest]: a fairly polished product. And when I got to grad school, I somewhat, that is for my
[Guest]: PhD in America, I somewhat went back to that idea that I had to get everything worked out
[Guest]: in toto before I began to write anything. And then I remember that there was a moment,
[Guest]: well, partly under the stress of writing so much in American grad school, you couldn't
[Guest]: quite afford to do that. But I remember a moment when it got to my thesis, where I was
[Guest]: still somewhat struggling with, you know, these different models. And my late supervisor,
[Guest]: now late supervisor, Steve Cohen, was remarkably productive, saying to me, look, Gandhi, you'll
[Guest]: never finish the PhD if you don't figure out how to proceed, you know, efficiently. And
[Guest]: he said, what I can teach you is not the substance of what you're going to write, but how to
[Guest]: get this thing done. It's a finite task, you'll never write something that is the definitive
[Guest]: work for all time. That's not how knowledge works. So throw that out of the window. Don't
[Guest]: be a perfectionist. Write what you know, quickly and hard and fast. Don't stop writing. If
[Guest]: you get stuck in one section, move on to the next one. Write every day, don't lose the
[Guest]: momentum. Write ungrammatically, write dot points, write fluently and floridly when things
[Guest]: are going well. You'll have to come back to those to edit and, you know, amend. Because
[Guest]: what looks wonderful on Monday begins to look terrible on Wednesday, and be prepared to
[Guest]: do that. And finally, he said, you know, when you got something done, and you're reasonably
[Guest]: happy with it, put it away in a drawer for at least a week. If it's a substantial piece
[Guest]: of writing, come back to it. In the meantime, go on to something else. And, you know, looking
[Guest]: at his example and how productive he was, and he wrote brilliantly as well, I just decided
[Guest]: I've got to give that a try. Plus, of course, you know, he said, if you don't give me the
[Guest]: first chapter in the next week, you're out of this program. So I mean, you know, the
[Guest]: prospect of a hanging concentrates your mind wonderfully, as Johnson said, and I wrote
[Guest]: it in a week. And after that, I think I never looked back. By the way, I should say, you're
[Guest]: very kind. I haven't written that many books at all. In fact, one of the stains on my record
[Guest]: is that I co-wrote one book. The book you very kindly mentioned on Roots of Terrorism
[Guest]: was written likewise in about four weeks in a fellowship in Australia. And this one was
[Guest]: written in three months. I've edited a lot of books, and I've written chapters for books
[Guest]: of other people and so on. But I'm a bit of a lazy guy that way. I mean, I need someone
[Guest]: to really push me and slap me around and kick me in the pants. And I write a lot for friends.
[Guest]: So if an academic friend says, oh, give me a chapter on this or write a piece for that,
[Guest]: or even this book, Nandini Mehta, who was an old friend at Juggernaut, said, come on,
[Guest]: Kanthi, I've asked you a couple of times, write this book quickly. It's time. And I
[Guest]: wouldn't say I did it out of a sense of obligation. I did it out of a sense of friendship and
[Guest]: not wanting to let her down one more time. So, you know, I'm a bit of an externally driven
[Guest]: writer. If you get me by the throat and shake me up a bit and shame me, I'll write.
[Amit Varma]: And that's pretty much the problem I face as well. If I have a deadline to give a column
[Amit Varma]: by, I'll give it. But if I have to be like internally driven, it's a bit of a problem
[Amit Varma]: though. I, you know, I keep telling my students, obviously about the, you know, the constant
[Amit Varma]: trade off that everything involves between getting it done and getting it right. And
[Amit Varma]: my point always is when it comes to the first draft, you have to get it done. You know,
[Amit Varma]: getting it right is something that you do in subsequent edits and so on. Now, I'm also
[Amit Varma]: intrigued by the notion that you moved away from the thought that you have to have everything
[Amit Varma]: figured out before you write. And I'm reminded of this quote by the economist Deirdre McCloskey,
[Amit Varma]: when she said, quote, don't wait until the research is done to begin writing because
[Amit Varma]: writing is a way of thinking. Research is writing, stop quote, her italics, she italicized
[Amit Varma]: is research is writing. Now, to what extent does writing and also teaching actually help
[Amit Varma]: your thinking with the subject like one of the things I liked about this book and that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, contributed to its lucidity was that there's a very clear framework through
[Amit Varma]: which you are looking at India China relations, you know, the four P's as it were, which we'll
[Amit Varma]: talk about in detail, you know, do you kind of begin with a framework does that sort of
[Amit Varma]: framework or the way of looking at a problem that getting meta about a problem as it were
[Amit Varma]: emerge while teaching while writing, and then you flesh it out? And do you think for that
[Amit Varma]: reason that those who write more will inevitably be better thinkers and those who write less?
[Amit Varma]: Because writing forces you to think that much more clearly and that much more deeply?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think you've raised a lot of interesting issues there. For me, I mean, with this book,
[Guest]: I know we'll get to it. But just in terms of the process, the publisher said, you know,
[Guest]: write something that's for a general audience, first of all, so don't have a big, complicated
[Guest]: theoretical framework that leads you into the subject and informs it and so on. But
[Guest]: on the other hand, I realized that, you know, what I would end up with as a result, then
[Guest]: might be just a long list of topics. And there are many things that are missing in the book,
[Guest]: the river water problem, Pakistan as an issue between India and China, trade and financial
[Guest]: relations between the countries. And they were all there in my original list. And I
[Guest]: think juggernaut books probably hope that some of those would all be addressed in the
[Guest]: book. But I realized fairly early on that I would just have a list. And I would knock
[Guest]: off all these topics, for instance, also the whole issue of India, China in different regions,
[Guest]: Southeast Asia, South Asia, Africa, Latin America. And, you know, first of all, I wouldn't
[Guest]: meet the wordage. But secondly, it would just be a list. And so it seems to me that one
[Guest]: of the things we're trained in an academic life, particularly is, you've got to try and
[Guest]: develop some kind of an argument. And that can come from two places, although I think
[Guest]: they're kind of linked. One place, you get your way knowing out of ideas is you go to
[Guest]: theory. And you sort of say, well, what would theory expect us to think about in terms of
[Guest]: the India, China relationship? Why they're in conflict? Why do they occasionally cooperate?
[Guest]: And there are some answers there, obviously, from international relations theory. The other
[Guest]: way is the other source of a sort of framework is to be a bit more inductive, bit more playful.
[Guest]: From what you know, if you're immersed in the area that you're going to write about,
[Guest]: you kind of throw up a set of topics, start to sort of group them and categorize them
[Guest]: and see whether something emanates from that. Now, pure methodologists in academic life
[Guest]: will tell you, never do that. Induction can never lead you to knowledge. But I think that's
[Guest]: hogwash. And I think there's actually a dialectic between the two. Nobody is tabula rasa. We
[Guest]: bring some theoretical assumptions, perspectives, arguments always to bear, because in a complex
[Guest]: world, you wouldn't see the woods for the trees. You couldn't put one foot forward in
[Guest]: front of the other, unless you had a theory of walking and where you're going. So you
[Guest]: need some proto-theory, and we always already have it. But you also need to be a bit playful,
[Guest]: and you're always receptive to experience the empirical test. Things are bubbling around
[Guest]: you and they impact on your sense experience. They modify your theory. So in this book and
[Guest]: in a lot of writing, I think I do what my supervisor did as well. He would say to me,
[Guest]: just chuck out a bunch of initial ideas that you have, a set of topics, literally spread
[Guest]: them out on the page with your pen and paper, your computer, and then start to sort of cohere
[Guest]: them into boxes, into categories. And he always quoted, I think, Aristotle to me saying, Aristotle
[Guest]: said that the first move in science is to put things in boxes. And I'm sure Indian forms
[Guest]: of knowledge and so on would probably give you some similar, very sensible advice. And
[Guest]: for me, I think I do go with that. I've got some working ideas. I don't work at them too
[Guest]: much. I don't develop them too much. And then I throw out literally sort of a bunch of words
[Guest]: on a piece of paper. And then I begin to cohere them. And I began to think of what kind of
[Guest]: boxes are them and linkages between them. And how many of these can I really handle?
[Guest]: How much of these make for some coherence? What will I have to throw out? Where is it
[Guest]: too much work? And I'm simply not an expert enough. And it's not the kind of area I should
[Guest]: delve into. Otherwise, I'd make a fool of myself, you know. And I think that's how the
[Guest]: four P's emanated. And throughout a bunch of topics, I reworked stuff that Juggernaut
[Guest]: had kind of pushed at me. And the four P's kind of popped up. And I tried to give them
[Guest]: some clothing to link them up a bit more conceptually back with my discipline. Juggernaut didn't
[Guest]: like it very much. They said it was a bit too much for the general reader. We had a
[Guest]: friendly disagreement. But, you know, ultimately, for a general readership, I think their instinct
[Guest]: was correct. And so I didn't elaborate these four P's and where they come from very much.
[Guest]: I could probably do that if you push me, or even if you don't, and say a little bit about
[Guest]: why I think they are the four important areas. And so I think that's how I operate in my
[Guest]: writing. One other thing that you touched on, which is quite nice, and one that I insist
[Guest]: on is the link between teaching and writing or research. And I think it's a very important
[Guest]: one. Sometimes you hear from academic colleagues that, you know, there's teaching and, oh gosh,
[Guest]: it's such a bore. And it takes time away from research. And I just don't buy that. My best
[Guest]: ideas have come to me when I've taught and I've had to explain in the most direct, sensible,
[Guest]: clear way to students, what are some of the fundamentals we're dealing with here? And
[Guest]: I've understood my discipline better when I've done that. And so, and you know, when
[Guest]: you do that, also, you kind of, when you're preparing slides or a lecture, you suddenly
[Guest]: realize that there are enormous gaps in knowledge. You think that there are all kinds of handy
[Guest]: dandy books and articles that will answer a certain question, and then you realize there
[Guest]: aren't. And that indicates that there's a gap and an opportunity to write something.
[Guest]: So I think that that's very important. But equally, research is very important to teaching,
[Guest]: which is to say, the best moment in teaching is when you can bring to bear an area that
[Guest]: you're mining in your research into the classroom. It just, you know, there's a, then a kind
[Guest]: of authenticity to what you say and do and a richness to it. Students can feel that you
[Guest]: have chewed on this and have really made sense of it. And I think they can feel the kind
[Guest]: of passion and excitement you bring them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's, that's fascinating. It's something I can relate to in the sense that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I felt that I began to understand writing better when I actually started teaching it
[Amit Varma]: and not so much before that. And equally, when I taught podcasting as someone who actually
[Amit Varma]: does a podcast, it just came that much more naturally and it also fed back. So it wasn't
[Amit Varma]: just that my doing of podcasting helped my teaching of it. But while teaching it, I began
[Amit Varma]: to think more at a meta level, for example, about the nature of interviewing and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the different kinds of approaches you can take to conversations and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: which I think also helped my craft as a practitioner. Now, here's a question, when you write a book
[Amit Varma]: and not just this book, but when you write any other book in a field where a lot of growth
[Amit Varma]: in terms of knowledge is sort of incremental, you know, gradually the layers come over years
[Amit Varma]: and decades and so on and so forth. It strikes me that there might be, therefore, two competing
[Amit Varma]: pressures that you might face. And one pressure would be that I have to say something new
[Amit Varma]: that I have to in some way, add to this body of knowledge, which could be dangerous because
[Amit Varma]: it could lead to someone trying too hard, for example. Or there could be a pressure
[Amit Varma]: which would probably, you know, maybe come from a publisher who might, you know, want
[Amit Varma]: to pitch a book for the masses or whatever. And there the pressure might be that come
[Amit Varma]: up with something definitive. Like if you're writing a book on India versus China, be definitive
[Amit Varma]: about the why, be definitive about the what will happen going ahead, which of course you
[Amit Varma]: can't, because it's incredibly messy and muddy. And, you know, every good scholar will have
[Amit Varma]: that humility to accept that, especially in a field like this, that there is so much that
[Amit Varma]: may never be known. How do you deal with these sort of competing pressures? Is this stuff
[Amit Varma]: that you've thought about? Have you ever as a young academic, perhaps aired on one side
[Guest]: or the other?
[Guest]: I suppose I have. I mean, I increasingly have become kind of, what's the word? I mean, slightly,
[Guest]: slightly more modest is the word that springs to mind right at the moment. And or moderate,
[Guest]: in a way, a different way of saying it is, I've stopped taking myself so seriously. And
[Guest]: what that means in the writing is that I'm committed to trying to present stuff clearly,
[Guest]: use the word kindly about the book, Lucidity. And I think that's an important thing to do
[Guest]: now more and more. And take the example of this book. I think those two pressures are
[Guest]: exactly right, which is that on the one hand, as academics, we're always taught, you know,
[Guest]: value add, look for something quite original that you're trying to say and communicate.
[Guest]: Others don't bother. I mean, you're just adding to the noise in the system and overloading
[Guest]: it. On the other hand, you know, I think the publishers set me a time limit, which meant
[Guest]: that I couldn't do, you know, a very original research. I couldn't delve into some archival
[Guest]: material that nobody else had touched or brought to light. I didn't have the time to come up
[Guest]: with a grand theoretical proposition or a set of concepts that are used to interrogate
[Guest]: relatively familiar materials and give us a different perspective on it. So I didn't
[Guest]: have that leeway either. And so it seemed to me that, you know, I ought to kind of make
[Guest]: a virtue out of all of these different constraints or opportunities and settle for the kind of
[Guest]: book in a way that Juggernaut were urging on me, which is in three months, can I pull
[Guest]: together quite a lot of stuff that's already out there that's quite well known and put
[Guest]: it into some sort of a framework, nothing too revolutionary, nothing too rigorous and
[Guest]: stringent intellectually such that I would have to get into very convoluted arguments
[Guest]: about theories and concepts and to show that, you know, here was a brilliant new incision
[Guest]: into the problem and a way of thinking about not just India-China relations, but perhaps
[Guest]: all these kinds of enduring rivalries. So it seemed to me that I needed to strike a
[Guest]: balance somewhere in between. And I think if the book has success, then it may have
[Guest]: struck that balance. I pulled together relatively respectable, well-known materials already
[Guest]: out there and pulled it into a simple framework, nothing too, too sophisticated. And that made
[Guest]: it fairly quick and easy to write. I think it makes it, and it may solve your problem
[Guest]: of someday remembering something about this book. The four Ps may stain your brain for
[Guest]: a while. And I think, you know, that might allow me to clothe the material in a way that
[Guest]: was easy on the eye of the beholder. I mean, I could dress in a very jazzy way when I go
[Guest]: out. But if you dress simply, perhaps the image of you walking around will endure. So
[Guest]: I think I tried to use the four Ps idea to make it simpler for a reader and yet provide
[Guest]: some kind of a scaffolding with which to arrange the empirical materials.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And you've absolutely succeeded in that in my view, but we'll talk about that as we
[Amit Varma]: go along. Let's go back to your personal history, which is also very fascinating because you
[Amit Varma]: are the son of a diplomat. You know, your father was a very famous diplomat, Girija
[Amit Varma]: Shankar Bajpai, who, you know, that's your grandfather. Sorry, that's what I meant. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And a famous photograph of him with Nehru as well at a 1948 conference and so on. And
[Amit Varma]: you travel the world, like in your book, you've written about how, you know, when the China
[Amit Varma]: War happened in 62, you were in London and it was cold and you were freezing. And that
[Amit Varma]: strikes me as, you know, traveling around the world and all of that as a very consequential
[Amit Varma]: childhood to have, because it means you are different from all the other kids your age
[Amit Varma]: at that point. And one can speculate about why that may be the case. Maybe you are less
[Amit Varma]: ossified in your ways of thinking about your people and other people and so on. Maybe there's
[Amit Varma]: a natural sense of curiosity that can evolve from there and so on and so forth. So, you
[Amit Varma]: know, looking back, what was your childhood like? And is there something to the sense
[Amit Varma]: that you feel that it shaped you differently from what it would have, say, had you just
[Guest]: grown up in Delhi, for example?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I'm a diplomat's kid, foreign service brat. And I think those kids all over the
[Guest]: world from whichever foreign service they're in, they do tend to be more ecumenical, perhaps
[Guest]: more liberal is the word or cosmopolitan. I think through their schooling as they move
[Guest]: around with their parents, inevitably, they're forced to look through other worldviews. You
[Guest]: go to school, you encounter foreigners, you in part take on their worldviews inevitably,
[Guest]: and see the world through their eyes as well. Curiously, of course, the other side of it
[Guest]: is that as a diplomat's kid, you're also immersed in your nationalism, your country perspective,
[Guest]: around the dinner table with your parents, your siblings, the other kids in the embassy,
[Guest]: the other members of the embassy. There's a very Indian kind of, you know, national
[Guest]: environment as well. And there's that lens simultaneously. So I think the thing with
[Guest]: diplomat's kids is that from almost the day of mother's milk, they're always bifocal,
[Guest]: always looking through things through that national lens, which they're immersed in,
[Guest]: and their heart beats to it. But they're also constantly encountering other views, how others
[Guest]: see us, how others see our country, how others see other countries, third countries, and
[Guest]: of course, their own country. And you as a diplomat's son have a certain perspective
[Guest]: on the host country. And then you get a picture of the host country refracted through the
[Guest]: lens of the citizens of that country that you encounter. I think diplomat's kids are
[Guest]: like that. And they have to be open to that. I mean, they have to fit in in both environments
[Guest]: and make sense of both environments constantly. So they're constantly testing reality against
[Guest]: both these lenses. And I mean, I think it's a good thing. I mean, I don't mean to say
[Guest]: that those who haven't had that opportunity don't have their own kind of strength, perhaps
[Guest]: are more unifocal and know what they know and are not easily deflected and have great
[Guest]: certainty about things that they do and think. And we need people like that in the world
[Guest]: as well. But we also need people who want to roll things around their tongue, who want
[Guest]: to be more playful, who want to be experimental intellectually. I mean, I don't mean to say
[Guest]: that I'm the most creative human being in the world by any means because of this upbringing.
[Guest]: I wouldn't say that's true. And there are other forces that operate on that issue. But
[Guest]: I think my reflexive starting point, as it were, is that I don't like to go with the
[Guest]: herd, with any herd. And I'm always, my antenna always go up when people are too insistent
[Guest]: on a singular point of view. And I think that, you know, that was a bit of a struggle for
[Guest]: me in my childhood. The first 11 years or so, my parents were outside India. They continued
[Guest]: to be, but they did feel when I was 11 years old that I had to come back to India and be
[Guest]: in an Indian environment, partly because they felt that I was losing touch with Indian reality
[Guest]: and also because they were moving around constantly and the schools were, you know, an unsettling
[Guest]: experience if you keep moving schools every three or four years. And so I went back to
[Guest]: boarding school in Delhi and then Dehradun. And I think it was a fabulous thing that my
[Guest]: parents did. And so I had an upbringing as a diplomat's kid where I sort of was raised
[Guest]: to be uncomfortable with herd mentalities, with givens, with an orthodoxy. And I think
[Guest]: that's remained with me. When I started out in more public life as an academic on television
[Guest]: in the eighties and nineties, when I was pretty active in Delhi, you know, I exited into a
[Guest]: period when I was very certain about stuff. And I argued very stringently about things
[Guest]: like India's nuclear weapons options and so on. I think actually after that period, an
[Guest]: intermittent phase of being so singular, I've come back to now rolling things around my
[Guest]: tongue, I think a bit more. And that's recovering that sort of diploma early, early immersion
[Guest]: in this bifocal world that I grew up in.
[Amit Varma]: So just just sort of thinking aloud. I mean, this brings me to another sort of question
[Amit Varma]: that often strikes me, like when I look at young people growing up today, so many of
[Amit Varma]: them choose to do all their thinking and their talking and their posturing and whatever it
[Amit Varma]: is in public, which strikes me as something dangerous, because, you know, if everything
[Amit Varma]: that I thought or wrote in my teens or twenties was, you know, on Twitter, and people took
[Amit Varma]: screenshots and all of that, one, of course, it would not be fair, because young people
[Amit Varma]: need that kind of space to grow up and change their mind and roll things on their tongue
[Amit Varma]: as you put it so well. But the other thing that it can do is that it can ossify you into
[Amit Varma]: positions, like when you're 17 or 18, you might go online, you might find a tribe, and
[Amit Varma]: you might join that tribe, and you're part of an echo chamber. And then you raise your
[Amit Varma]: status within that echo chamber with harsher and harsher pronouncements and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: by signaling virtue more vociferously than the next guy and so on and so forth. And because
[Amit Varma]: you take those chances, you start believing them, they become much harder than they would
[Amit Varma]: otherwise have been. And to me, that strikes me as a danger and a shame that like once
[Amit Varma]: you write something down definitively, once you identify yourself with a certain way of
[Amit Varma]: thinking, then you change, you change to the extent that you're more likely to hold on
[Amit Varma]: to that. And so do you think that that's a danger in these modern times where a position
[Amit Varma]: once taken actually ends up shaping who you are, like in your case, you said, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you had more certainty about certain positions in the 80s or whatever, when you would be
[Amit Varma]: on television as a talking head, but those clips don't exist on YouTube, right? People
[Amit Varma]: are not going to put screenshots of your old article saying, hey, you said this in 1983.
[Amit Varma]: So you have any thoughts on the changing times and how they can change a person's development
[Amit Varma]: of self even because you're just so much more out there?
[Guest]: Yeah, isn't it an irony that this technology that came along of the social media and all
[Guest]: of that, and the unending, limitless kind of memory now with cloud and so on that's
[Guest]: there, I suppose the promise was that this would lead to kind of enormous liberalization
[Guest]: of thought that people would be able to express themselves who otherwise would not be able
[Guest]: to because they couldn't write a column for a newspaper. They wouldn't be asked on television
[Guest]: as a talking head, but now they can. I mean, because there's so many platforms where they
[Guest]: can be heard. And so I guess, I mean, I went along with that thought that there's something
[Guest]: greatly liberalizing that would happen as a result of this. Although I wasn't much until
[Guest]: very recently on social media platforms or any of those kinds of instruments. But it's
[Guest]: turned out that, as you say, I mean, they've become kind of silos, echo chambers. They've
[Guest]: become platforms for insulting people. And when you insult someone, I mean, there are
[Guest]: a couple of reactions. One is they could exit the system, though that seems to be quite
[Guest]: hard to do. You just become aloof and exit. The other is that, you know, you fight back
[Guest]: and you fight back, you dig in to your point of view even more stringently and become more
[Guest]: stubborn and lose your plasticity and openness to disconfirming facts or to alternative perspectives.
[Guest]: And the third, of course, is that, you know, you do sort of on the platforms themselves,
[Guest]: you know, show that you can change your mind and change over time, more or less. And I
[Guest]: think that it seems to me that all three are quite difficult. But I would like to think
[Guest]: that I would try and do the third, which is try to signal that if you do make a point
[Guest]: about my work or something I've just said, which holds promise of even a critique of
[Guest]: me, that I'm open to it. And, you know, I went on Twitter when this book was coming
[Guest]: online because Jagannath said, come on, Kanthi, you've got to just get out there and move
[Guest]: with the times. And of course, it's good for the book and your ideas. And I've already
[Guest]: had people challenge me, sometimes dismissively, sometimes slightly insultingly, sometimes
[Guest]: generously, but with disagreement. And I think one has to deal with that. And I hope it hasn't
[Guest]: been huge, but I've tried to deal with it by sort of saying, yeah, you may have something
[Guest]: there. The book was a first cut at this problem. It's not the last cut on the problem. It's
[Guest]: not the definitive word. And by the way, what is a definitive word in, you know, in such
[Guest]: a complicated world? But if it's provoking and fostering a conversation, as long as we
[Guest]: keep it more or less polite, let's proceed. So I think, you know, to my mind, we're stuck
[Guest]: with these platforms. I mean, whether we like it or not, I don't think we're going to resile
[Guest]: and move away from them very much. And there's something emancipatory and celebratory about
[Guest]: them. And I think we have to work our way through to a place where some of the really
[Guest]: dark tonalities will reduce. And people will learn that, you know, insulting, terribly
[Guest]: stubborn kinds of sticking to your points of view, being dismissive about others, really
[Guest]: it just doesn't work. And I still have that positive progressive view that dialogue in
[Guest]: itself, they'll be learning from it. And I think, you know, I'm just getting a sense
[Guest]: in the last few months that I've been on Twitter, that something like that is already perhaps
[Guest]: beginning to happen. And the last point I would make is that, you know, I mean, nobody
[Guest]: can be consistent over their entire lifetime, and it would be idiotic to be so. I think
[Guest]: that was addressed to Gandhi on his, you know, his change of view of violence and war and
[Guest]: his participation. You know, back in the day, he had come out in favor of recruiting troops
[Guest]: for the British cause in the early part of the 20th century. He had tried to recruit
[Guest]: people for the Boer War. He had, you know, participated as an ambulance person in the
[Guest]: First World War, I think, or the Boer War. So people said to him, well, I mean, back
[Guest]: then you did that. And now you're preaching nonviolent, you're not consistent. And, you
[Guest]: know, he said, Yeah, I mean, I'm not consistent. Times change, I change. Why would you expect
[Guest]: me to be consistent? And I think Keynes said it more. Was it Keynes who said something
[Amit Varma]: like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Keynes, if the facts change, I change my mind. So what do you do?
[Guest]: Yeah, well done. I mean, you said it much. Yeah, that's exactly. And I usually push that
[Guest]: out there as well. So I think that's a useful thing to say.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I think you've kind of largely had a sort of a lucky experience on Twitter, because
[Amit Varma]: a lot of your interactions would kind of be self selected, like people who are a already
[Amit Varma]: interested in your work, and therefore a certain kind of person and be when you follow a lot
[Amit Varma]: of scholars you admire, they follow you back, you're kind of curating your feed, I think
[Amit Varma]: one of the essential ways of tackling Twitter is curate your feed very carefully. And you
[Amit Varma]: can get enormous insight and have great conversations that way. But by and large, the other thing
[Amit Varma]: that I noticed about Twitter, which is interesting is that, you know, we tend to think that the
[Amit Varma]: whole space is incredibly toxic. Now, the truth is that there are these vocal minorities
[Amit Varma]: who are incredibly toxic, because they are caught in these echo chambers and always posturing
[Amit Varma]: and so on. But there's a vast silent majority, which is not like that at all, which is something
[Amit Varma]: that I realized through my podcast and through the courses that I've done where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I popularize them through Twitter, people sign on you, you realize what those people
[Amit Varma]: are like, and then you look on Twitter where everyone is shouting. And I'm kind of baffled
[Amit Varma]: by just the fundamental rudeness that Twitter brings to the discourse, like the act of quote
[Amit Varma]: tweeting, for example, where you quote tweet someone and you mock them. And that's so incredibly
[Amit Varma]: rude. Because you know, if you and I were talking at a party, and I said something that
[Amit Varma]: you disagreed with, you would not immediately turn to our neighbor and point at me and say,
[Amit Varma]: look, this guy is a fool. This guy is a moron. He's saying this. That's just so incredibly
[Amit Varma]: rude. It's so bizarre, you know, that we have to not take anything in good faith at all.
[Amit Varma]: But this is a digression. Why should we talk about these times where we still have the
[Amit Varma]: past to talk about? So tell me a little bit more about your childhood. Did you like to
[Amit Varma]: read you studied at Doon School also for a while? What was that like? Because on the
[Amit Varma]: one hand, you pointed out that your parents wanted you to be back home because they felt
[Amit Varma]: that you were being away from the realities of India as it were. Now, when I look back
[Amit Varma]: on my also privileged childhood as a son of a civil servant, although I didn't live all
[Amit Varma]: over the world in India itself, but nevertheless massively privileged childhood and going
[Amit Varma]: to good schools and so on. And as I grew into adulthood, I realized what a blinkered view
[Amit Varma]: of the world I had been given just by, you know, the occasion of my privilege that okay,
[Amit Varma]: I am the child of these people. You know, I'm using my dad's car to go here or to go
[Amit Varma]: there. This is the kind of school I am everyone else is also incredibly pampered kid. And
[Amit Varma]: this is like one view of India from one particular vantage point. And you kind of grow older
[Amit Varma]: each adulthood and, and you realize that there's so much more to this. And so one what was
[Amit Varma]: Doon School like and two, I presume that everyone you studied with at the time would be present
[Amit Varma]: day elites. Like I did an episode with Ramchandra Guha where he told me about his time in college
[Amit Varma]: in Delhi where his classmates, his list of classmates is like a who's who of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: India today, a small group of people. So tell me a bit about that experience and how your
[Amit Varma]: thinking kind of evolves through that. And then we'll move on to your personal journey
[Amit Varma]: and you know, what you studied and all of that.
[Guest]: Well, first of all, Ram Guha was with me at school at Doon School. He was one year behind
[Guest]: me. And there you are. So, but I think that, you know, first of all, when I came back to
[Guest]: India, I went to St. Xavier's School in Delhi, in Civil Lines in Delhi. It had a boarding
[Guest]: section in those days, and quite a number of diplomats kids, Indian Foreign Service
[Guest]: kids were there. And that's where I started out. Although my father was a Doon School
[Guest]: boy. In fact, he was the first school captain of the school. So, you know, I had a link
[Guest]: to the school, my brother had been there, my uncles had been there, but my father didn't
[Guest]: actually send me there. He was posted to Pakistan at that time in the deputy high commissionership
[Guest]: of in Karachi. And he would come to Delhi periodically. And he thought that my transition
[Guest]: back to India along with my two elder brothers and my younger sister, that he would see us
[Guest]: occasionally and that would help us transition back to Indian life. So I was in St. Xavier's
[Guest]: for three and a half years. And when they decided to close the boarding, he then petitioned
[Guest]: Doon School to take me because I joined the school quite late in comparison to other boys.
[Guest]: So I think the experience of the two schools were very different. I mean, St. Xavier's was
[Guest]: basically a huge day school with this little boarding element. And as you know, it's a
[Guest]: Jesuit school. So there was a very, very different kind of atmosphere. I wouldn't say it was
[Guest]: a religious atmosphere in the sense of, you know, we all had to keep to sort of Catholic
[Guest]: orthodoxies or anything like that. It wasn't shoved down our throat. Although there was
[Guest]: an evening prayer and you could say it or you could just hold your hands and say your
[Guest]: own prayer quietly and so on. But I think, you know, there was studying and there was
[Guest]: a bit of stuff on the sports field and that was pretty much your life. And it was very
[Guest]: disciplined in the sense that every moment of your day was metered and clearly your studies
[Guest]: were the primary thing. And the students there, they were all mostly kids from Delhi who for
[Guest]: one reason or another, you know, couldn't be day students. Maybe they lived too far
[Guest]: away in Delhi. They were people from outside Delhi, but from in and around Delhi, not very
[Guest]: far away. Some diplomat's kids as well. But Dhoon School was very different. And, you
[Guest]: know, I think we think that, and there's a view, popular view, that Dhoon School, Mayo
[Guest]: College, Ajmer, Sindhia School in Gwalior, these so-called public schools, they're the
[Guest]: Baba Lok school. But actually the picture is rather different. It's the big day schools
[Guest]: that are the Baba Lok schools, because the big business guys, the very senior civil servants,
[Guest]: the politicians' kids, they tend to go to the big day schools, Modern School in Delhi,
[Guest]: St. Columbus, St. Xavier's in Bombay, Campion and schools like that. Whereas the kids who
[Guest]: go to Dhoon School or Mayo College, these are people who are from the second and third
[Guest]: tier towns mostly of India. And in Dhoon School, they are mostly from the second and third
[Guest]: tier towns of UP, now Uttarakhand as well, Haryana, Punjab, sometimes from Bihar, UP,
[Guest]: Madhya Pradesh, some kids from Southern India, and later some students from Northeast India.
[Guest]: But Delhi Party, so-called, or Bombay Party or Calcutta Party, these were really a distinct
[Guest]: minority of the school. And the reason for that is that it was the students from these
[Guest]: small towns, Saharanpur, places like that, Bhatinda, et cetera, et cetera, who didn't
[Guest]: have a lot of facilities, whose local schools weren't necessarily all that great. And these
[Guest]: second, third tier elites who wanted to give their kids an imprimatur, a better school
[Guest]: experience as well, then looked to boarding schools like Dhoon School. And so actually,
[Guest]: most of the students, even in my time, I wouldn't say they were the greatest elite types. There
[Guest]: were some Maharaja's kids, there were some big business kids, there were some senior
[Guest]: civil servants kids, but there were a lot of kids from small businesses or farmers'
[Guest]: children. I mean, I don't mean small farmers, but medium-sized farmer families and so on
[Guest]: and so forth. People who were in second and third tier towns from services backgrounds,
[Guest]: that is to say they provided some service locally, the tea estates in Assam and so on.
[Guest]: And actually, that's grown. When I was headmaster of the school, we did a survey of the kinds
[Guest]: of students. And I can tell you that most of the children overwhelmingly were from the
[Guest]: second and third tier towns. And contrary to the view, I would say a very large proportion,
[Guest]: more so than when I was at the school as a boy, were comfortable in Hindi primarily.
[Guest]: And certainly their parents were more comfortable in Hindi. I would say more than 50% of the
[Guest]: kids at Dhoon School, their parents would be more comfortable in expressing themselves
[Guest]: in Hindi. And so that was one part of the school that it actually wasn't that Babalu
[Guest]: elite mostly. And I think the other thing was about Dhoon School was that it forced
[Guest]: you out of, I mean, of course, the school is a gated community, but you have to get
[Guest]: out and live your life also in Dehradun on outings, for instance. And it's not Delhi.
[Guest]: The school has no amenities of the kind that you have in the big cities. I mean, in those
[Guest]: days in Dehradun, and even until recently, there were no malls, there were no multiplexes,
[Guest]: there was certainly no discos and all of that. And the other experience was that particular
[Guest]: to Dhoon School was that from the beginning, thanks to the first two headmasters we had
[Guest]: and the Indian teachers of the time, they insisted on two things that forced you out
[Guest]: into the community. One was from the beginning, what later got to be called in India, SUPW,
[Guest]: Essentially Useful Productive Work. And I think it was probably pretty much started
[Guest]: at Dhoon School and a few other schools like that, which is, there was an insistence that
[Guest]: the students had to go out and do community work in villages in particular. And that was
[Guest]: a requirement of the school, you had a little logbook, and you had to write down how much
[Guest]: of that you did, you could do some of that within the school as well. But quite a lot
[Guest]: of it was going out into the community. The second was that every term for five days,
[Guest]: you had to go trekking in the hills. And you went to very remote places and locales from
[Guest]: Dehradun northwards. And I mean, I don't want to oversell it as a kind of foray into ordinary
[Guest]: India, but it was at one level. I mean, you came up against just, you know, nature, the
[Guest]: mountains, the hills, ordinary people in villages who often helped you as you were, you know,
[Guest]: dealing with the terrain and geography and so on out there. So I think that in some ways,
[Guest]: it was more of an experience of getting out of metropolitan life that I had grown up in,
[Guest]: because I grew up in Paris and London, before I came home to Delhi. And then if I got out
[Guest]: of St. Xavier's School, it was Delhi of the 1960s. But Dehradun of the 1960s was something
[Guest]: very different. And the mountains and hills and surrounding villages, I mean, it was not
[Guest]: a metropolitan life in that sense at all. And I think the school still gives people
[Guest]: a bit of a connect to an India that's outside metropolitan life. And one reason I took the
[Guest]: headmastership, and I'll just end the segment with that thought, perhaps, is that I wanted
[Guest]: my children who were growing up kind of the Baba Logue life in JNU, where I was a warden
[Guest]: of a hostel, and where they were going to, you know, kind of Baba Logue schools, the
[Guest]: new schools, the Vasant Valleys, or the Sriram schools, where all the kids were businessmen's
[Guest]: kids or very senior civil servants kids who were all very metropolitan and cosmopolitan.
[Guest]: Whereas when they got to Doon School and Wellam Girls, my daughter went to Wellam Girls, later
[Guest]: my son went to Doon School. I mean, it was a very different set of parents and boys.
[Guest]: And I thought my kids needed that they needed to get out of Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's fascinating a lot to think about. You know, I must confess here that I had that
[Amit Varma]: impression of Doon being a Baba Logue kind of school as well. You hear about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the Gandhi's going there and so on and so forth. And that's what we imagine. So this
[Amit Varma]: is quite fascinating. So, you know, we'll take another digression before we get back
[Amit Varma]: to our narrative of personal biography. And this, you know, I'm struck by the phrase,
[Amit Varma]: it was not like the Delhi of the 1960s. And obviously, I understand the contrast, which
[Amit Varma]: you're talking about between 1960s Delhi and 1960s Dehradun. But, you know, for someone
[Amit Varma]: who lives in Delhi today, for a young person today, how would you describe 1960s Delhi?
[Amit Varma]: Like how has it changed? What was it like back then? Because I would find it impossible,
[Amit Varma]: for example, very hard, not impossible to describe 1980s Delhi, which I know a little
[Amit Varma]: bit better. But what was 1960s really like? I'm also curious.
[Guest]: It was a very quiet town. And I literally mean that. I don't mean it metaphorically.
[Guest]: It was quiet. You could go out into, you know, central Delhi, Lutyens' Delhi, and walk around
[Guest]: there with, there was no hubbub. There weren't, you know, pile driving cars and trucks and
[Guest]: buses and honking and all of that. It was a quiet city. It was gracious in the sense
[Guest]: that there wasn't this kind of very aggressive sort of scenes and moments that you felt,
[Guest]: you feel now, or even in 1980s Delhi. And I think it was a Delhi, I think, to be fair,
[Guest]: it was a Lutyens' Delhi in the sense of an elite that was more Anglicized, more Westernized,
[Guest]: living in bungalow life and in the few select colonies. It was a much cleaner Delhi. It
[Guest]: was a very livable city at that level. There weren't any fancy malls, obviously, or fancy
[Guest]: cineplexes. There were very few foreign goods. There was none of that. If you went to Khan
[Guest]: Market, there were no shop hoardings visible, pretty much. There were a few cars and motorbikes.
[Guest]: And you went into shops where everything was available in cupboards, behind glass cupboards.
[Guest]: And it was very unglamorous, all Indian goods, basically. So it was a very different kind
[Guest]: of Delhi. I think it was comfortable at that level. And it was a pretty Westernized, elitist
[Guest]: Delhi. And for a diplomat's kids, and you know, my father's family had been in Delhi
[Guest]: since New Delhi was built in the 1920s. My grandfather had come from UP at that time.
[Guest]: And so, personally, of course, when I did get out of St. Xavier's School, I came back
[Guest]: from Dhoom School briefly on my way to see my parents wherever they were abroad. It was
[Guest]: a Delhi where I knew a lot of people through family connections and so on. So it was a
[Guest]: different experience, I think. And there's a sort of a sense of nostalgia about it. It
[Guest]: was a very tractable Delhi. It wasn't very big, I think. I mean, when I went from St.
[Guest]: Xavier's School to visit my grandmother in South Delhi, you know, she had a plot of land
[Guest]: in Friends Colony. My friends who used to laugh at me and say, oh, you're going off
[Guest]: to Faridabad, you know. So it was the edge of town. And a really big adventurous outing
[Guest]: was to go to South Extension. When my parents would come from Pakistan to visit for a time,
[Guest]: they would take me to South Extension. And my friends would be very excited about, you
[Guest]: know, you're going to the edge of the town. And Vasant Vihar, I mean, if you looked out
[Guest]: for Modern Bazaar, the shop there, there was nothing but farmland there. So, you know,
[Guest]: the landscape was very, very, very different in Delhi. Delhi was civil lines and North
[Guest]: Delhi and all of that. And then, you know, Rajpath and Lachchind's Delhi and Defence
[Guest]: Colony, Friends Colony were the outer limits. And so I think it was very tractable. I would
[Guest]: walk sometimes. I could walk from my uncle's house at Wellesley Road, from the Armed Forces
[Guest]: Officers Mess there to Connaught Place. Connaught Place was a centre for, you know, things happening,
[Guest]: discotheques and shops and fast food, such as it was. And, you know, I would think nothing
[Guest]: of walking there as a 14-year-old or a 15-year-old, getting into a scooter. And, you know, you
[Guest]: would be on a street, waiting for a scooter, and it would be pin drop silence. And then
[Guest]: you would hear a car come. If I could very badly mimic the sense of it, of a kind of
[Guest]: eeeewwwwww, a car would go and then there would be silence again. That's unimaginable,
[Guest]: I think, almost anywhere in Delhi today. So, yeah, that was Delhi. And I miss it. But,
[Guest]: you know, Delhi today has its own excitement and vibrancy, I think. So, you can't live
[Guest]: in the past.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, you can't live in the past. You also mentioned that you went to Dehradun because
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one reason was that you wanted your kids to have a life outside the Baba Log life
[Amit Varma]: and all that. Baba Log, by the way, would be such a lovely name for a novel because
[Amit Varma]: you can read it both ways, right? Baba Log and Baba Log. And that's one reason why you
[Amit Varma]: went there. But I guess another reason for why a place like that would be extremely attractive
[Amit Varma]: is like you said, the quietness of it, the pace of life being so slow, the hills around
[Amit Varma]: and so on. And, you know, at an abstract level, many of us aspire to that. We say, nahi yaar
[Amit Varma]: paharo mein jaake rahenge and we'll, you know, live a quiet life like that. But at the same
[Amit Varma]: time, the kind of life you might want to live in the abstract collides with the kind of
[Amit Varma]: things you want to do in the concrete, which often require being in a big city, which are
[Amit Varma]: often not just work, but often just other things, meeting friends regularly and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth. Is that something you've thought about? Because when I was just reading the
[Amit Varma]: bare facts of your sort of biography, it struck me that you bounced around a lot that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you've travelled with your diplomat father, you've been in Doon School and all
[Amit Varma]: of that, you've done the schooling here, your sort of BA and MA at British Columbia, then
[Amit Varma]: your PhD at Illinois, then you come back to Doon School and in between you've taught at
[Amit Varma]: Doon School, you come back there as a headmaster, then you come back to Delhi, you're at JNU
[Amit Varma]: and now you're in Singapore. So how does one think of that? Like, does one think of how
[Amit Varma]: one wants to live one's life purely in terms of career goals, that these are the things
[Amit Varma]: I want to study or explore, or this would be an interesting institution to be part of?
[Amit Varma]: Or have you also had other considerations while kind of planning your life out that
[Amit Varma]: this is also where I want to be, this kind of life suits me?
[Guest]: I think, I mean, I'd love to say that, you know, I was a person who thought that bouncing
[Guest]: around and moving jobs and so on was, I mean, that I kind of was ahead of the curve. I mean,
[Guest]: who stays in a job for very long now? It seems to be the norm that you move around and you're
[Guest]: hyper mobile between jobs, between locales. But I don't think I was that clever or imaginative
[Guest]: or adventurous. I just went where the jobs were. I mean, my father was a civil servant.
[Guest]: He had a plot of land that he inherited, but he had no money to give me. He was not really
[Guest]: willing to exert himself to get me a job of any kind. And the one time he tried, I mean,
[Guest]: it was a farcical and it didn't suit me anyway. So I had to make my way in the world. And
[Guest]: I just went where I thought somebody would actually want me. And my first foray to Doon
[Guest]: School in 1979-80 was, I mean, basically, I mean, my dad made it fairly clear that I
[Guest]: couldn't be on the payroll for very long. And I had to get off and start arranging my
[Guest]: life and my finances. And when I said, no, I'm not interested in sitting for the civil
[Guest]: service or going into business, then he was like, OK, beta, then better make some plans
[Guest]: of moving on. You can't live with me forever. And not being adventurous, I just looked for
[Guest]: who would want me. I hoped that someone in journalism might want me, but there weren't
[Guest]: many places in those days. So I wrote off to my old school. And so I went to Doon School
[Guest]: to teach for a year. But what I realized was that I'm not really a schoolmaster per se.
[Guest]: And so after a year, I went on to do the Ph.D. in America. But when I was finishing at Illinois,
[Guest]: finishing the Ph.D., what I did know was that I didn't want to live in America. I thoroughly
[Guest]: enjoyed my time in the U.S. and earlier in Canada. But it just didn't seem to me that
[Guest]: America was really deep in my heart that way. And American lifestyles suited me, even though,
[Guest]: you know, up to that point, most of my life had been in the West. But I just thought that
[Guest]: there was something in terms of lifestyles and the future that didn't work for me. And
[Guest]: my wife was Canadian, white Canadian. And I think she sort of had a little bit of a
[Guest]: sense that she would like to be back in North America for the longer time. But she was very,
[Guest]: very kind to me and I think indulged me a lot. And she agreed that, you know, we would
[Guest]: move back to India. And I was encouraged by my supervisor, Steve Cohen, who wanted to
[Guest]: train Indian and other South Asian students to go back so that they could hopefully make
[Guest]: a contribution to the intellectual life of their own country, particularly academic life.
[Guest]: And so with his encouragement, also, I thought about coming back to India as soon as I finished.
[Guest]: And my first job, actually, you missed it, but I don't blame you, but it was in Baroda
[Guest]: at MS University in Baroda. And that was partly because although JNU was a natural habitat
[Guest]: for me, it has such a massive School of International Studies, one of the biggest in the world,
[Guest]: and 85 faculty members at the time that I finally went there. But I still had an instinct
[Guest]: that I wanted to start out decentred from the centre. I wanted to be away from Delhi.
[Guest]: And I'd had my first child, she was very young, my daughter Gayatri. And I think my wife,
[Guest]: Bobby, was a bit dubious, living in a small town in India. She knew Delhi, she'd lived
[Guest]: in Dehradun with me for a while. But I thought that it would be a bit of an adventure and
[Guest]: it would be nice to see another part of India. And I had a cousin there who taught in the
[Guest]: history department. And she told me about the job opening. And there weren't too many
[Guest]: other jobs in international relations. I applied for it. I got it. And I remember I finished
[Guest]: defending my PhD thesis on a Saturday morning or some such. And I was back in India on the
[Guest]: Wednesday and I think I joined MS University on a Friday. I mean, I may have got the days
[Guest]: a week and all that mixed up, but it was within four or five days of finishing the PhD. I
[Guest]: was back in India and in harness, as it were. And, you know, from there, I moved back to
[Guest]: the States for a while. I thought the university, which had been glorious for two or three years,
[Guest]: was going in a direction that I wasn't enjoying, ultimately. And that's a slightly different
[Guest]: story. It was getting a bit too nativist for me, but they were good years. I had a second
[Guest]: child and I went back essentially to Illinois for about a year. But again, with no thought
[Guest]: of really staying there, although, again, I think my wife would have quite liked to
[Guest]: be back in North America with her family. But again, I mean, one day I got a phone call
[Guest]: sitting in Illinois in my office and it was Abid Hussain, the famous Indian civil servant
[Guest]: and ex-ambassador to the US. And he'd been, I think, deputy chairman of the planning commission
[Guest]: or some such. And I had never met him. And he just said, Babu. And I said, I'm sorry,
[Guest]: who is this? He said, I'm Abid. Abid Hussain. And of course, I'd heard of him, but he spoke
[Guest]: to me in such a familiar way that I was kind of drawn to him and into his world almost
[Guest]: immediately. And he was vice chairman of the Rajiv Gandhi Foundation and the Rajiv Gandhi
[Guest]: Institute of Contemporary Studies, which is the think tank wing of the RGF. And he said,
[Guest]: I've heard about you from Steve Cohen, who's here at the Ford Foundation in Delhi. And
[Guest]: he said, you're very keen to come back to India and come for a couple of years and help
[Guest]: me with this think tank. And then you can do what you like. And I mean, a few, I finished
[Guest]: the semester. A few weeks later, I packed my bags. And Bobby and I and the babies headed
[Guest]: home. So I think, you know, I mean, I won't tell you every step of the way of what happened
[Guest]: since then. But I think I went where serendipitously jobs opened up. I think there was a broad
[Guest]: trajectory, which was that I always wanted to be home in India, doing something in India.
[Guest]: I was comfortable. So it was a personal kind of comfort issue. I did have a bit of a sense
[Guest]: of, can I do something for my country? But I mean, I'm not trying to dress myself up
[Guest]: as being somebody overly noble and all of that. But I just sort of felt comfortable
[Guest]: and good. And it seemed to work for me. And I would say it sort of paid off, you know,
[Guest]: my whole professional life developed and flowered really in India. And I'm tremendously grateful
[Guest]: to the institutions that took a chance on me, my students that helped make me what I
[Guest]: am, the media in the 1980s that gave me an opportunity to make a bit of a name for myself
[Guest]: and all the rest of it. I mean, my colleagues. And that's how all again, why did I go to
[Guest]: Doon School? I got a call one day as I was rushing off to do my early morning lectures,
[Guest]: which I'm never good at in early in the morning. And somebody just said, Dr. Bajpai. And I
[Guest]: said, yeah, I said, I'm so and so from a search company. And somebody mentioned that you might
[Guest]: be a candidate for the headmastership of the school. It's your old school. And I said,
[Guest]: oh, my gosh, well, I'm running off to class. I mean, I can't discuss it. But no, I never
[Guest]: thought about it and said, well, are you kind of open to it? And I said, well, which old
[Guest]: boy wouldn't be? But not really. No, not at this point. And he said, but would you like
[Guest]: to have a chat later about it? And I said, well, of course, I can't say no to that. And
[Amit Varma]: so you know, another serendipitous thing happened. And that took me off to there.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating. And what's also fascinating is when you talk about these two phone calls,
[Amit Varma]: and I you know, I must remind our listeners that today when we say received a phone call,
[Amit Varma]: it means you know, you've got your mobile phone and mine is always on silent. So if
[Amit Varma]: I get a phone call, it's because I'm looking at my phone already maybe going through Twitter
[Amit Varma]: like a junkie and you know, the phone flashes and I pick it up. But otherwise, I'm not going
[Amit Varma]: to pick it up. And in at the time you would have got the phone call, it would have been
[Amit Varma]: a physical instrument, it would have rung two or three times, you move towards it, you
[Amit Varma]: wonder who's calling, there's no caller ID, you pick it up, and then the person says what
[Amit Varma]: they say. And that's also such a charming recounting Mr. Hussain saying Babu, it's like,
[Amit Varma]: it's so cinematic, almost a scene that you kind of described. So maybe after the biography
[Amit Varma]: for movie is made on your life, that could be a pivotal scene, maybe add some dramatic
[Amit Varma]: elements to it, look outside after the phone call and your car blows up, something like
[Amit Varma]: that. Anyways, let's sort of go back to the final strand of your personal journey that
[Amit Varma]: I'm curious about, which is that how did you get into the specific areas that you got into?
[Amit Varma]: Like when people are kids, you know, they'll dream of being a pilot or an ice cream seller,
[Amit Varma]: or a movie star, they won't dream of being like a foreign policy scholar or a noted academic
[Amit Varma]: and so on. So how did this kind of happen? Was it again serendipitous that you do one
[Amit Varma]: thing at a time and it takes you to that final destination? Or did you have a sense at some
[Amit Varma]: point that these are the things that I find fascinating, that I want to go deeper into,
[Amit Varma]: that I want to wake up in the morning and look forward to the day and reading these
[Amit Varma]: kind of books, studying this kind of subject will give me that happiness? How was that
[Guest]: for you?
[Guest]: I think there was no straight line for me as there probably isn't for most people, you
[Guest]: know. And as I said, I was not a person who knew so definitively everything that I thought
[Guest]: and wanted to do and how I looked at the world. But I think quite early, I had a sense that
[Guest]: something to do with the written word always was very important for me. My eldest brother
[Guest]: Shyam was, we would say, a bookworm. I think he introduced me to the world of books a lot
[Guest]: and things like chess and intellectual matters a lot. And my other brother Ishwari, who went
[Guest]: on to be a journalist, he introduced me to sports and competition and being in the world,
[Guest]: you know, being outside of myself. And I mean, I play a lot of sports, or I did, but I'm
[Guest]: not a sportsman per se. It wasn't that influence that Ishwari had on me. It was that being
[Guest]: in the world, being active in the world. And he's a person of strong views and ideas, and
[Guest]: he can be much more argumentative in a good way. And I think I got that from him, from
[Guest]: my brother. And I think from my younger sister, I got a sense of a certain kind of loyalty
[Guest]: or commitment to a sort of family and all of that. And the metaphor for me there is,
[Guest]: I think, you know, not being very public or demonstrative, but doing something quietly
[Guest]: towards the well-being of others. I think my sister is a very outward person giving
[Guest]: to family and all of that. And what that means, I think, for me in my arena was, I mean, trying
[Guest]: to give something back to the public. I mean, I don't want to state it too grandly. I think
[Guest]: my siblings had quite an impact on me. But why this area then? I mean, I think it developed
[Guest]: gradually. My father forced me to do economics, because my brothers, especially my eldest
[Guest]: brother said, oh, no, the way the world is going, you know, they were all history students.
[Guest]: My dad had done history at St. Stephen's. Both my brothers did history at St. Stephen's.
[Guest]: And they got together when I was finishing at Dune School and said, Dad, you know, Kanti
[Guest]: cannot do history, and better for him not to go to St. Stephen's. Too many bachelors
[Guest]: went there and kind of wasted their time. So get out of it. And my dad was an ambassador,
[Guest]: High Commissioner in Canada. And I went off to do an economics degree. But my heart was
[Guest]: not in economics, really. Although I kept, and I thank economics for, you know, instilling
[Guest]: me the idea of thinking about things a bit systematically, trying to have a bit of a
[Guest]: framework, introduced me to issues like the philosophy of science and things like that,
[Guest]: that I think held me in good stead. And I loved mathematics. So the only attraction
[Guest]: I had in economics was math, to be honest. But what developed in me through my undergrad
[Guest]: days in economics was that I started to do some political science courses. And something
[Guest]: along the way in my school life, I began to develop this feeling that Indian democracy,
[Guest]: I mean, that it seemed very firm. This is, I mean, I went to Canada in 1973. I began
[Guest]: my economics degree in 1973. And of course, it was kind of a high tide still of democracy.
[Guest]: It was before the emergency. We were still in a kind of post-Neruvian glow, a Neruvian
[Guest]: glow. But I think I had a little bit of a sense that Indian democracy was still quite
[Guest]: tenuous. And in one of my courses in my second or third year under a professor called John
[Guest]: Wood, who was an Indianist, I read a lot of stuff about civil-military relations. And
[Guest]: what came out of that was how many countries in the third world had had military coups,
[Guest]: including Pakistan, our neighbor. Here was a military that was born of the same original
[Guest]: military, the same genus, the Indian army, but it had intervened in politics in 1958.
[Guest]: And by the way, I'd lived in Pakistan in the 60s because my dad was the deputy high
[Guest]: commissioner there. And so I had a sense that it may be that Indian democracy was perhaps
[Guest]: more tenuous. And I thought initially that India also might succumb to, in a moment of
[Guest]: crisis or instability, to a kind of right-wing military coup at some point. And later, I
[Guest]: began to worry about the left wing. I thought, I don't know at what point, but gradually
[Guest]: perhaps it was the Naxalites of the late 1960s. My brother, Shyam, had been at St. Stephen's
[Guest]: College and some of his friends had become Naxalites and so on. And so maybe I knew a
[Guest]: little bit about that and I was studying political philosophy alongside economics. And I had
[Guest]: a sense that there could be a moment when the right wing and the left wing in India
[Guest]: would be thrown into this kind of antagonistic dialectic and the liberal space in India would
[Guest]: collapse. And my interest in social science became more political science than economics.
[Guest]: And even in economics, the course I loved the most was economic development theory.
[Guest]: And quite a lot of my interest there was, what are the political underpinnings of economic
[Guest]: growth and development? And I thought, perhaps naively, that democracy and liberalism were
[Guest]: made for long-term economic growth. And I was a bit worried that India... I was puzzled
[Guest]: why India, as a relatively liberal democratic country, was still, in those days, the so-called
[Guest]: Hindu rate of growth. We weren't growing very fast. So I think that led me to grad school
[Guest]: in America, where I wanted to do civil military relations. That's why I ended up with Steve
[Guest]: Cohen at the University of Illinois, because he was the expert on the Indian Army, on civil
[Guest]: military relations in India. And I didn't know it at the time, but he was already more
[Guest]: or less finishing a book on the Pakistani military. And I hoped to write a book on comparative
[Guest]: civil military relations in South Asia. I thought India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh. When
[Guest]: I arrived there, he'd already written the book on Pakistan. But what stayed with me
[Guest]: there was that, I mean, I was introduced to international relations there. I had come
[Guest]: thinking doing comparative politics, civil military relations, doing political theory,
[Guest]: because I enjoyed that. And I thought American government and politics, because at that time,
[Guest]: it was the city on the hill. It was the world's greatest democracy. And if you were concerned
[Guest]: about democracy, then maybe there was something to learn from America. But I started to take
[Guest]: some courses in international relations, and I had inspiring professors. And my fellowship
[Guest]: was in arms control and security issues, international security. And I saw a kind of nexus, and I'll
[Guest]: end with that thought, which is that, would democracy survive in times of intense kind
[Guest]: of security turmoil? Whether internal security turmoil, as I suppose happened in Pakistan,
[Guest]: leading to the end of democracy there, or other forms of internal turmoil, or in terms
[Guest]: of an enormous challenge externally, under which democracy might crumble. So I thought
[Guest]: my worry was that, and a connecting thread to my earlier interest in democracy was whether
[Guest]: in India, the discourse around security might lead to a point where democracy might be called
[Guest]: into question. And I thought the antagonism with Pakistan, particularly in the early 80s
[Guest]: when I was there, and overlooking the possibilities of cooperation with Pakistan might someday
[Guest]: lead to a situation where democracy might come under stress in India. And so my PhD
[Guest]: was on SARC, an unlikely subject, the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation,
[Guest]: because I wanted to look at the prospects of cooperation in the region, and how that
[Guest]: might make in all the countries, it might be a part of a kind of democratic spirit that
[Guest]: would flower in the region, and undergird and strengthen democracy for the long term.
[Guest]: I probably now reading back into it a bit too much, and trying to make myself too clever
[Guest]: about it, and maybe too philosophical about it. But there was something like that was
[Guest]: brewing in me. And that's how my academic career sort of flowered from there.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, when we are young, we are filled with this intellectual excitement whenever
[Amit Varma]: we discover a new subject, especially when it comes to answering big questions about
[Amit Varma]: the world. So there is this allure of grand theories, right, whether it's in economics
[Amit Varma]: or political science or whatever, you know, the first grand theory that you come across
[Amit Varma]: that is attractive, and that explains everything in a coherent way. Doesn't matter if the explanations
[Amit Varma]: are true or false, because who knows at that time, but that seems to offer a coherent frame
[Amit Varma]: of looking at the world, one is tempted to adopt it. And then what happens is that over
[Amit Varma]: a period of time, you know, you kind of get mugged by reality, you begin to realize that
[Amit Varma]: none of the grand theories are necessarily, you know, the whole answer to anything as
[Amit Varma]: a friend of mine likes to say, the quote goes, all models are false, but some models are
[Amit Varma]: useful. So what was that intellectual journey on your part, like, in terms of what were
[Amit Varma]: the theories that you were drawn towards? What frames did you feel had the greatest
[Amit Varma]: explanatory power? And earlier in this conversation, you spoke about how you had certainty about
[Amit Varma]: a lot of things in the 80s, where you weren't afraid to express your opinion firmly, but
[Amit Varma]: now your view is much more kind of nuanced. So take me a little bit through your personal
[Amit Varma]: intellectual development also of looking back at that time and saying that, okay, these
[Amit Varma]: are the things that attracted me then that I felt explained the world. And this is how
[Amit Varma]: my frame has evolved over time, and so on.
[Guest]: You know, I was a bit stupid. I don't think I had a huge, coherent intellectual framework.
[Guest]: Partly, I think the way my political science training was, was that it wasn't a high theory
[Guest]: school. I think some of the other departments were like that, in you know, the great schools
[Guest]: of the East Coast or the West Coast of America. But at Illinois, it wasn't such a high theory
[Guest]: school. And I think we dealt more with kind of more meso or micro theories. And a lot
[Guest]: of my kind of theoretical predilections were towards issues related to deterrence theory,
[Guest]: for instance, which is the idea of how you with nuclear weapons or with conventional
[Guest]: military weapons, how can you prevent another country from attacking you? That's a kind
[Guest]: of a micro theory. And I delved a lot into the logic of deterrence theory. I knew a lot
[Guest]: about civil military relations theory. Why coups happen? Why do military step into power
[Guest]: and then fail to relinquish power at some point? For my thesis, I read a lot about regionalism.
[Guest]: Why do countries come together, particularly to cooperate at the regional level? I had
[Guest]: a whole argument about how we think about regions. I mean, regions are a bit seamless.
[Guest]: How is it that we draw a boundary around a region at a particular place, more or less?
[Guest]: You know, again, a kind of middle range theory I had, I didn't have a big picture IR view
[Guest]: of the world. I mean, your listeners may not be in this area, but there are basically three
[Guest]: big paradigms in international relations. Realism, which is a power based understanding
[Guest]: of the world. Liberalism, which is that certain institutions and rules and norms out there
[Guest]: like international law or diplomatic understandings and negotiations is what makes the world between
[Guest]: nation states. And the third is constructivism, which is that we make our world. There's certain
[Guest]: kinds of deep values and identities we hold to that we construct periodically, which have
[Guest]: great power. And, you know, it's those that affect how we think about other societies
[Guest]: and our relationship with them. But, you know, at that time, I wasn't in that game. I was
[Guest]: in these middle range theories. In that sense, I was a bit stupid. But in a sense, I was
[Guest]: a problem solver. I was attracted to big theory. I read a lot of sociology, literary criticism.
[Guest]: I read the French theorists, the Derrida's and the Foucault's and the Roland Barthes
[Guest]: and all of that, mostly so that I didn't look stupid. It took quite a long time for
[Guest]: that to settle in me to help me make sense of the world better. But I had a kind of problem
[Guest]: solving view of theory. It would help me solve certain kinds of intellectual puzzles or concerns
[Guest]: and not much more, I think. And so that's where I was. I mean, I looked at problems
[Guest]: that interested me, and then I tried to turn to theories that I thought would explain that.
[Guest]: Not very big theories, but kind of intermediate theory. So I didn't have a, you know, a very
[Guest]: coherent picture. Although deep down, I suppose, and I suppose that's true even now, I was
[Guest]: kind of a liberal. I'm a liberal in domestic politics, probably, and I'm a liberal internationally
[Guest]: as well. And I suppose there was always a substratum of that. I just didn't quite know
[Guest]: it. I didn't quite have the language and the profundity to figure that out, or even
[Guest]: the self-reflection. But I think gradually, that's where I ended up. And I think something
[Guest]: of what I learned very perfectly through these French theorists, you know, the postmodernists
[Guest]: and poststructuralists and deconstructionists and so on, came back to this kind of bifocal
[Guest]: worldview, which is, don't make too many big assumptions about there being certainties
[Guest]: undergirding your worldviews. There's no language game that produces a stable set of assumptions
[Guest]: and arguments for all time. You can't derive an understanding of the world about everything
[Guest]: once and for all from some Olympian standpoint, which you hold forever. And so I guess I have
[Guest]: a kind of shifting good-humored liberalism, again, a reflex against holding to certainties
[Guest]: in a very orthodox position. So I guess my meta-theory is, don't have a firm theoretical
[Guest]: base and be wedded to it for all time. So that's my governing theory.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll just think aloud here. And because I'm thinking aloud, what I say might be somewhat
[Amit Varma]: naive, but then it seems to me that one could say that at the extremes, there are two kind
[Amit Varma]: of broad ways of figuring the world out. And one is that you have a grand theory and you
[Amit Varma]: make everything fit. And the other one is that you have no grand theories, but you get
[Amit Varma]: in the nitty gritties of every problem. You solve one problem at a time and eventually
[Amit Varma]: whatever intermediate theories, as it were, emerge and whatever grand theories are useful
[Amit Varma]: at a particular moment in time to explain something are fine. And it seems to me that
[Amit Varma]: you would then have taken the second of these approaches where you are not sort of guided
[Amit Varma]: by a particular way of explaining the world, but you're just trying to figure small things
[Amit Varma]: out and seeing where they kind of lead you. So, you know, would this kind of be, therefore,
[Amit Varma]: an accurate way of summing up the different approaches? And are these different approaches
[Amit Varma]: something that exists out of a thought experiment? Are there people you can actually look at?
[Amit Varma]: Maybe this ties into the fox and hedgehog sort of description of Isaiah Berlin.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly. I was going to say, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So, so is it there within academics as well, for example?
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely. I mean, I think, you know, as you were speaking and before you uttered
[Guest]: those words, I was going to say, yeah, Isaiah Berlin, hedgehog and the fox, where the hedgehog
[Guest]: knows only one thing, if I get it right. And the fox is slower, but it knows many things
[Guest]: and it, or it tries to do many things. And I guess I'm more a fox and I would wear that
[Guest]: as a bit of a badge of honor. But again, the world needs both kinds of people. And I just
[Guest]: hate monocultures. And so we need hedgehogs and we need foxes. And sometimes we need to
[Guest]: be hedgehogs and sometimes we need to be foxes. So even I wouldn't typify myself totally and
[Guest]: forever as a fox. There are times when I've been a hedgehog. I mean, for, for some time
[Guest]: in the 1980s, 1990s, particularly, I became a hedgehog. I was obsessed with the issue
[Guest]: of India's nuclear weapons and deterrence, and that's all I cared about. And I got very
[Guest]: argumentative and bolshie over it. I think I became a bit of a bore and, you know, I
[Guest]: bored myself at some point and I think things moved on and quite rightly. And I had to go
[Guest]: back to being more of a fox and I'm glad I did. And so, yeah, we need both kinds of people.
[Guest]: And broadly, I think Berlin was right. You can, you can divide the world up into hedgehogs
[Guest]: and foxes and your own persona. At times you're a hedgehog and times at other times you're
[Guest]: a fox. And I think that's fine. I think that's, that's good for the world.
[Amit Varma]: And again, thinking aloud, I wonder if the imperatives of the role that you give yourself
[Amit Varma]: actually shape you in one direction or the other. For example, if you're a TV expert,
[Amit Varma]: TV experts are supposed to have certainty about the world. So you would imagine a TV
[Amit Varma]: expert would be a hedgehog like Harry Truman when he when he was president once said, give
[Amit Varma]: me a one handed economist. And obviously, the reason he said that was all his advisors
[Amit Varma]: were saying on the one hand this on the other hand that and he wanted a hedgehog that just
[Amit Varma]: tell me what to do tell me that this is the way to go. It strikes me that then there is
[Amit Varma]: this sort of dual imperative that on the one hand, as an academic, you do want to have
[Amit Varma]: intellectual humility, not be tied down to any one idea and be a bit of a fox. But at
[Amit Varma]: the same time as an academic, if you want your ideas to be part of the mainstream discourse,
[Amit Varma]: then you do want to be a bit of a public intellectual. But being a public intellectual, you'll gain
[Amit Varma]: as much visibility as as much as you can be a hedgehog because people crave certainty
[Amit Varma]: people don't, you know, crave nuance. So is that something that you've thought about? Or
[Amit Varma]: is that something that when you look around you and you see public intellectuals or you
[Amit Varma]: followed their journeys as academics to a particular place? Do you see that kind of
[Amit Varma]: sort of tussle happening within them?
[Guest]: I do. I mean, and as I said, I mean, society needs both kinds of people. And so it's right
[Guest]: and proper that there are those who are the hedgehogs and they have a very certain worldview,
[Guest]: they express themselves very unambiguously. They tell us how we should proceed. And we
[Guest]: need that in times of crises, and so on. And they often lead us in whichever field, including
[Guest]: the political field. But as a check and balance, we need foxes. And I think that's important
[Guest]: as well. And there are times when I've been a hedgehog, my children would probably say
[Guest]: that I was too often at home, but and sometimes I'm impatient with myself. And I think, well,
[Guest]: both in academic life, and in public intellectual life, I should have been more of a fox or
[Guest]: certainly my television experience forced me towards being a hedgehog. And sometimes
[Guest]: my brother who was in television used to say, don't do this. On the one hand, on the other
[Guest]: hand, I mean, and I stick to a view, you've got 30 seconds before the anchor interrupts
[Guest]: you. And there's no time for that. If you want to make an impact, be blunt. And I think
[Guest]: there's place for that. And I tried to do it. But it was never quite me, I think. And
[Guest]: I think there are people who read me that way. I did a, you know, an interview with
[Guest]: a student of mine, who's now in Australia yesterday. And he said that, you know, a lot
[Guest]: of former students of mine, who were never very happy with my political stance in India,
[Guest]: thought that I was a dyed in the wool, peacenik, liberal, secularist, and I couldn't listen
[Guest]: to anyone else. I don't know. I mean, I must have come across like that. And some part
[Guest]: of me is that, that I do hold those values dear. And sometimes I do get on my horse and
[Guest]: insist on that. But I think deep down, I'm willing to listen and adjust and think things
[Guest]: through and, of course, be persuaded and so on, that I'm not the last word by any means,
[Guest]: and I don't know all the answers. So I think that's important. And, you know, I mean, cometh
[Guest]: the hour, cometh the man, cometh the hour, cometh the stance. There are some times when
[Guest]: you might just have to take a stand and take the risk of holding to, hewing to a point
[Guest]: of view and sticking to it. And you probably know that moment when it comes. And I think
[Guest]: you have to rely on your instinct and your ratucination at that point to tell you, here,
[Guest]: I have to take a stand. There's nothing else. And I can't listen to too much nuance and
[Guest]: all of that. I've just got to stand for something. But that can't be a permanent position, it
[Guest]: seems to me. So I think I'll just let it wash over me. When I feel I absolutely have to
[Guest]: take that stand, I will. Does that mean that I'm the person that you would always call
[Guest]: up in a crisis or to sign a petition or to stand shoulder to shoulder on an issue and
[Guest]: all of that? Yes, no, maybe, I don't know. That's someone else's judgment. But I think
[Guest]: more and more to myself, I'll have to take the risk of making those judgments as and
[Guest]: when you know, the moment comes.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and just again, thinking aloud, I'd say that, you know, the way I sort of
[Amit Varma]: determined this for myself is that when it comes to values, I'm a hedgehog, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there are certain things I believe in, and I'm unequivocal, and I have certainty of those
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, individual rights and personal autonomy and all of those things, whatever
[Amit Varma]: they are. But when it comes to facts, then I'm a fox, I'm willing to, you know, consider
[Amit Varma]: different interpretations and different versions of events. And I'm always open. So I don't
[Amit Varma]: have one big theory that kind of explains the world. But when it comes to values, I
[Amit Varma]: do have a very clear idea of what I stand for. We'll go in for a quick commercial break
[Amit Varma]: now.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games. Well, if you want
[Amit Varma]: to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win win proposition for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to Indian colors.com. Indian colors licenses images of fine art from some
[Amit Varma]: of the best contemporary artists in India, and adapts them to objects of everyday use
[Amit Varma]: like tote bags, pouches and home decor items. You get to surround yourself with the finest
[Amit Varma]: modern Indian art at affordable prices, and artists get royalties for every product you
[Amit Varma]: buy win win game. The Indian colors new ranges in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses
[Amit Varma]: for women and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmay Samanta,
[Amit Varma]: Manisha Gherabaswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra, and Jaydeep Mehrotra. Stay home but
[Amit Varma]: dress smart. And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not, you can
[Amit Varma]: show them you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian colors. Corporate
[Amit Varma]: gifting is also available. So head on over to Indian colors.com that's colors with an
[Amit Varma]: OU and make art a part of your life. And hey, for a 15% discount. Use the code unseen. That's
[Amit Varma]: right on scene for 15% off at Indian colors.com. Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm
[Amit Varma]: chatting with Kanthi Bajpai about his superb book on India China relations India versus
[Amit Varma]: China. And before we get to the book itself, which as I told you, I found very enlightening
[Amit Varma]: and lucid and I think everyone can really read it in one sitting honestly, which is
[Amit Varma]: a compliment not a bad thing. Tell me about your interest in China per se like I followed
[Amit Varma]: the thread up to your, you know, getting interested in international relations and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: beginning with, you know, looking at civil military relations and all of that. And I
[Amit Varma]: presume during this phase, you would have studied the 62 war and all of that. When did
[Amit Varma]: you really start looking at China closely and start sort of refining your prisms and
[Amit Varma]: also this entire period when you've been an academic is a period of almost tectonic change
[Amit Varma]: in both China and India in different ways, where just so much has changed. And at the
[Amit Varma]: same time, how has a scholarship been changing? How has you know, within the academic world,
[Amit Varma]: for example, is it a danger that there are fashions in terms of ways of looking at a
[Amit Varma]: particular subject or a subject area? How has that been evolving? When did you start
[Amit Varma]: getting into it? How did your thinking on it evolve as the years went by?
[Guest]: Yeah, so you know, you pointed out that in the book in 1962, my dad was a diplomat in
[Guest]: in London in the High Commission. And at the time of the war, it was sepulchral at home.
[Guest]: It was not that we talked about the war a lot. In fact, it was the opposite. There was
[Guest]: just a kind of gloomy silence in cold London during those weeks. And, and so I think, you
[Guest]: know, something like all Indians, the war has left a bit of a scar and a vestige in
[Guest]: our, in our, you know, memories and hearts. And I think the Chinese don't quite get it.
[Guest]: But it's there in most Indians, at least to the elite, middle class type of people. So
[Guest]: I suppose it was there in me. And, but my focus, as I was explaining earlier, was really
[Guest]: much more India, Pakistan, and South Asia, and the prospects of cooperation and the possibilities
[Guest]: of conflict there. So China was not a big thing. Although, in the early 90s, I wrote
[Guest]: some stuff on, well, two or three things happened. The first was, somebody asked me to write
[Guest]: on confidence building measures, this idea that countries that were locked into conflict
[Guest]: could through some forms of communication and transparency, ensure that they didn't
[Guest]: get into a scrap militarily, unwittingly, that out of uncertainty and miscommunication,
[Guest]: at least you wouldn't fight. And so military talks, better diplomatic contacts, arrangements
[Guest]: like that would ensure that it didn't happen unwittingly. So I wrote a piece on that. But
[Guest]: again, drifted back to South Asian issues, particularly the nuclear issue. But Abid Hussain,
[Guest]: actually, you know, coming back to him, put it in my brain, I think a little bit, that
[Guest]: China had to be watched. He was very liberal, but he began to focus on this issue of India's
[Guest]: economic reforms, and how India had to get out of Hindu rate of growth and so on. And,
[Guest]: you know, this is the period of 1992, 93. The economic reforms had just begun after
[Guest]: the crisis. And he was looking at China, and asking the question, how come they've done
[Guest]: so well, and India lagged behind. So talking to him and helping him write some speeches
[Guest]: and so on. My friend and colleague Varun Saini, who is now Vice Chancellor of Goa University,
[Guest]: we were part of his little kitchen cabinet, where we would toss issues around. And he
[Guest]: was constantly talking about India's prospects. And we would look sideways at China. And one
[Guest]: time we were visited by quite a high level delegation of think tankers and academics
[Guest]: from China. And what struck us there was how much more work on India there was in China
[Guest]: than there was in India about China. And I remember in the meeting there, in Hindi, Abid
[Guest]: just said to me, and he said, they've got so many people who have learned Hindi and
[Guest]: Indian languages. You know who can speak Mandarin? And I didn't know the answer quite, but I
[Guest]: said, I don't know. I mean, through the various programs, maybe we could get 20-25 people
[Guest]: outside of the diplomats who had learned Mandarin in China. And he said, I'll have to fake the
[Guest]: figure a bit. Otherwise, it looked very embarrassing. So China was beginning to seep in. And he
[Guest]: was always talking about globalization and how China had taken advantage of it, and India
[Guest]: had got left behind. And from that, Varun and I both began to think and write a little
[Guest]: bit about how India would begin to try and maybe catch up with China. What kind of growth
[Guest]: rates would we need? We didn't write a lot about it, but here and there. And I think
[Guest]: that thought stayed with me. And I think I wrote some pieces at that time, late 90s,
[Guest]: middle 90s, about the gap already with China was beginning to be very significant. And
[Guest]: what would be the implications of that? And then I think that went into cold storage.
[Guest]: I went back to the nuclear tests and Pakistan and so on and so forth. And then when I finished
[Guest]: Doon School, I went to Oxford. Instead of going back to JNU, I had an invitation to
[Guest]: come to Singapore, but I chose to go to Oxford at that time. And there, I found that a lot
[Guest]: of the kind of excitement was over China and its rise in a way that I hadn't appreciated
[Guest]: being at Doon School and dealing with South Asian issues so much. China was in everyone's
[Guest]: lips all the time in a way that India certainly was not. And it just struck me then more and
[Guest]: more. And then another one of those phone calls came along. I got a call from my old
[Guest]: friend Kishore Mebubani, who I had met at Harvard many years earlier at a conference
[Guest]: on civilizational conflict, which Sam Huntington had organized. And he wrote the paper on Southeast
[Guest]: Asia and civilization issues, and I wrote the paper on India. Anyway, he had asked me
[Guest]: earlier whether I had wanted to come and teach at Singapore, at least for a couple of years,
[Guest]: when I had chosen Oxford at that time. But he persisted. He said, you know, China is
[Guest]: the big issue. Sitting here in Southeast Asia, we can see it even more clearly than you can
[Guest]: see it sitting in Oxford. And by the way, this is the place to think about and study
[Guest]: China and India-China. And why don't you come here instead? And various things happened,
[Guest]: and there's a story there. But at some point, that was part of the reason that I made the
[Guest]: move to Singapore. And of course, once I made the move to Singapore, it was China, China,
[Guest]: China, but also, very importantly, quite a lot of interest in India in a way that was
[Guest]: not true, oddly enough, in Oxford. Those two things came together, and Kishore played a
[Guest]: big part in sort of pushing me more in that direction of develop this idea of India-China
[Guest]: relations, cooperation, and in the shadow of conflict. And I suppose that's what really
[Guest]: then brewed and brewed. And I did various things here to take forward an India-China
[Guest]: agenda, which I could talk about if you're interested. But in a way, that led up to the
[Guest]: moment when I got that other phone call, which is from Nandini Mehta on behalf of Chicky
[Guest]: Sarkar to write this book on India-China relations.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating. I've just read one book by Kishore, which has a provocative title
[Amit Varma]: of Can Asians Think? I read it a couple of decades ago. And I noticed just now, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I couldn't remember the name of the book that I've read. So I googled that and I noticed
[Amit Varma]: his latest book is called, Has China Won? Which is also a provocative title, good titles
[Amit Varma]: for books. Do tell me more about the India-China agenda. I'm very curious, like, first of all,
[Amit Varma]: to begin with, in Singapore, how different would the gaze on China be? Because it's physically
[Amit Varma]: much closer, because I guess there is much greater access to insiders and to Chinese
[Amit Varma]: scholars and all of that. And how did your interest develop here? What are the areas
[Amit Varma]: you were looking at? This is quite fascinating. So do tell me more.
[Guest]: Yeah, sorry. So one part of your earlier question I didn't answer, which was kind of the thought
[Guest]: process about how to think about China academically and so on. So I think in certainly when I
[Guest]: was at Oxford and earlier, the burden of scholarship was China's peaceful rise, and seemed to be
[Guest]: going well. And the idea was how to continue to bring China into kind of a liberal international
[Guest]: order. And the prospects seemed quite good through trade, China was joining all these
[Guest]: international institutions. And so the narrative was all good. I mean, there was uneasiness
[Guest]: here and there and particular episodes where China was a bit more aggressive. But on the
[Guest]: whole, there was a sense that, you know, China was rising peacefully and would play a more
[Guest]: or less responsible role. But I think that Singapore did partake of that. But Singapore
[Guest]: has always had its weather vanes or antenna up and sensitive to other perspectives and
[Guest]: possibilities. And I think Singapore certainly wants to ensure that exactly that happens,
[Guest]: that China rises peacefully, it's accommodated appropriately, and that it is socialized into
[Guest]: this more or less rules-based liberal order. But it's always had a worry that that might
[Guest]: not happen, that other countries might provoke China beyond a point, or that things might
[Guest]: develop within China that would deflect us from that. So I think that I kind of followed
[Guest]: that trajectory, which is, I went from quite a complacent attitude towards where China
[Guest]: was in the world. I mean, when I was charting this idea of China's growth and what it implied,
[Guest]: it was more, how could India reach those kinds of growth rates and catch up, but not from
[Guest]: a very alarmist point of view, you know. And I think that fitted in with this kind of China
[Guest]: rise thesis that was prevalent everywhere as well. There were lessons to be learned
[Guest]: from China, and then China was to be accommodated in a correct way, not to be appeased, but
[Guest]: to be accommodated where appropriate. I think in Singapore, there was already a sense that
[Guest]: that might not quite work out, and so one had to give thought to something else. But
[Guest]: of course, Singapore itself very much needs and wants and hopes that China will be peaceful
[Guest]: and it'll be accommodated in the right way. And it has friendships with the West and friendships
[Guest]: with China, and it tries to, you know, reconcile that. So when I came here, I think I began
[Guest]: to look a bit more at the arguments for why the rise may not be altogether peaceful. And
[Guest]: in the context of India-China, where I'd been a bit more complacent, I began to think that
[Guest]: everything may not be necessarily quite so smooth. I mean, I came here in 2010, 2011,
[Guest]: and already there were signs that things were sharpening, although the relationship was
[Guest]: not where it is today, of course. I think, and a lot of my colleagues look at China issues
[Guest]: and there's a lively debate here on relations with China. And one of the things that Singapore
[Guest]: deals with is that, of course, geographically, it's much more proximate to China. It's got
[Guest]: a population that is 70% of Chinese ethnic origins, 70 plus. So there's another kind
[Guest]: of relationship to China that goes beyond just geopolitics. There's an economic relationship
[Guest]: to China, which is very vital, as it is for everyone in Southeast Asia. So, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, thinking about China here is a very different ballgame. There are many other factors
[Guest]: at play here. And what that suggests is that it's not just the China rise story. When you're
[Guest]: in a region like Southeast Asia, the connective tissues are ethnic, diasporic, cultural, historical,
[Guest]: very profoundly. They are questions of geography and the intimacies that come from that, which
[Guest]: even a country, you know, such as India may not quite have because it's got the Himalayas
[Guest]: in between. And certainly the Western countries don't have that kind of intimacy. So they
[Guest]: look at China in a different kind of way. But this region must factor that in constantly
[Guest]: when thinking about China. And they have many deep institutional links over the last 20,
[Guest]: 30 years with China through many international institutions, ASEAN, East Asia Summit, APEC,
[Guest]: bilateral dialogues, etc., etc., which India, at least until the last 10, 12 years, did
[Guest]: not really have and which some Western countries, most of them don't have except for the United
[Guest]: States. So I think that, you know, there are many more lenses through which you look at
[Guest]: China here in Southeast Asia. And perhaps that's why, you know, my book also has these
[Guest]: four different peas or lenses through which I look at India, China, the general ontology,
[Guest]: you know, the broad way we think about a subject and its constituent parts. In this part of
[Guest]: the world, it's a more pluralistic ontology of looking at China. And I think maybe some
[Guest]: of that filtered into my book.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll come to your book in a moment. But a final question about this sort of field
[Amit Varma]: of India, China studies like it strikes me and I'm thinking aloud and you can tell me
[Amit Varma]: to what extent this would be true. One, a lot of policy of countries is shaped by elites
[Amit Varma]: in some way or the other. I mean, obviously, you know, politicians have incentives where
[Amit Varma]: they've, you know, where more and more they have to be populist and they have to think
[Amit Varma]: about what the people feel and popular sentiment and all of that. But a significant amount
[Amit Varma]: of it is shaped by elites in most countries. That's number one. Number two, my premise
[Amit Varma]: would be that, therefore, academics like yourself and academics in all the places where you've
[Amit Varma]: taught and worked have some kind of influence. It's limited, but they have some kind of influence
[Amit Varma]: that they will often consult for governments, they'll have, you know, entry points to talk
[Amit Varma]: to babus and sometimes some politicians and all of that is there. And the third thing
[Amit Varma]: that I'm then struck by is that whatever the extent of this elite shaping of public policy
[Amit Varma]: might be in say countries like the USA, which has a rich tradition of think tanks and parties
[Amit Varma]: feeding into the think tanks, and to a smaller extent in India, what is that extent in China?
[Amit Varma]: Because China from the outside at least seems to be an incredibly opaque system, where you
[Amit Varma]: know, the people in charge are not as accountable to the people as in these democracies. Though
[Amit Varma]: as Manoj Kevalramani enlightened me in a previous episode that they do really care about what
[Amit Varma]: the people think, and they're always trying to shape those narratives, but not in the
[Amit Varma]: same way as in India, where there are elections all the time and so on. So how much of an
[Amit Varma]: influence are thinkers and academics like yourself in even more of an ivory tower when
[Amit Varma]: it comes to the context of policy within China, than they would be in the US and India. And
[Amit Varma]: this seems kind of rambley again, I'm kind of thinking aloud. So excuse me if any of
[Amit Varma]: these are just, you know, wrong assumptions.
[Guest]: No, I think you've got a lot that's spot on there. I mean, I mean, first of all, academics,
[Guest]: you know, I think we ourselves undermine our influence. But after all, we're the people
[Guest]: who educated the people who run the country. We're the people who educate most of the elite,
[Guest]: because they all go to colleges and universities. All the journalists who shape opinion, and
[Guest]: the broadcasters all went through our hands, all the businessmen went through our hands.
[Guest]: So I sometimes I'm very puzzled by this notion that academics are Lotus eaters, thumbsuckers
[Guest]: out there somewhere in some ivory tower, you know, and that's all, they're kind of useless
[Guest]: people who that we sort of tolerate them, they have a profound impact on how we think
[Guest]: about issues, because they train people, and then those people go out and shape the world
[Guest]: every day, and shape wider opinion. So it seems to me, on that point, academics everywhere,
[Guest]: including in China, I mean, who in China has not been educated by an academic and the university
[Guest]: structure there. So they're all products of that. And to that extent, I mean, their influence,
[Guest]: the influence of academics is profound, lasting, and subtle. So I don't think we should ever
[Guest]: undermine that kind of thought that they're important. I think in China, it would be a
[Guest]: mistake to think that academics, public intellectuals, even journalists, and so on, social media,
[Guest]: you know, that it doesn't have an impact. It very much does. I mean, this is my instinct.
[Guest]: I am not a China specialist, per se. I haven't lived there. I visited several times, of course,
[Guest]: I talked to Chinese colleagues, and you just get a sort of a sense of it, you know, reading
[Guest]: their press and opinions and things like that. And then I teach Chinese students, we have
[Guest]: a good number of Chinese students in my classes, and so on. I mean, it would be astonishing
[Guest]: if Chinese people were not influenced by their academics, their media, their social media.
[Guest]: I mean, they would be the most amazing people on earth if they were more or less impervious
[Guest]: to it, no matter how much the government tries to control it. Indeed, their elites, the Communist
[Guest]: Party, their rulers would be amazing people, like gods. And we know that even gods are
[Guest]: influenced by human beings. So, you know, I mean, I'll just begin with the presumption
[Guest]: that they lend an ear, they're influenced by, they can't separate themselves from the
[Guest]: people and their thoughts. And I think they made it very clear over time that they are
[Guest]: affected by those pressures and imperatives and, you know, what ordinary Chinese people
[Guest]: may be saying. And we know that at the micro level in government in China, local protests,
[Guest]: the interaction with local people, with the Communist Party and administration, I mean,
[Guest]: they have an impact. And the Chinese Communist Party is extremely sensitive to what people
[Guest]: out there think. I mean, they may not show it, they're not going to declare it, but they
[Guest]: are extremely sensitive. And my instinct is that, particularly in India, this government
[Guest]: is very, very attentive to how the Chinese Communist Party, as a party, has sent its
[Guest]: influence and its kind of administrative tentacles to the smallest, most remote part of China.
[Guest]: And those tentacles, tentacles may not be quite the right word, those arteries, I mean,
[Guest]: they take ideas arterially out there, and a certain number of ideas and perceptions
[Guest]: come back up through the arteries. And I think this government in India, particularly the
[Guest]: BJP and its various affiliates, are quite intrigued by how well, in fact, there is this
[Guest]: movement of ideas and thoughts from the party down to the micro level and back from the
[Guest]: micro level in a constructive way to the to the party. And I think there's something there.
[Guest]: It would be amazing again, if the Chinese Communist Party could, you know, just sit
[Guest]: up there on these Olympian Heights, sending out famans and diktats and so on, and not
[Guest]: bother to listen to anything that's out there. And that's not the history of Chinese political
[Guest]: thought either. I think that there's much more going on at those levels, and the Chinese
[Guest]: Communist Party is very attentive to it. And one of the difficulties, probably in respect
[Guest]: of India-China relations and dealing with, let's say, the border issue, is that today
[Guest]: you don't have a magisterial personality like Mao, or a super magisterial personality like
[Guest]: Mao, or even Deng Xiaoping, who could swing a deal where China makes some significant
[Guest]: concessions on the border with India in the way that they could have. I mean, Xi Jinping,
[Guest]: he is magisterial in some ways. And, you know, we hear every day about how he's taken control
[Guest]: and he's president or general secretary for life and all that kind of stuff. But I wonder,
[Guest]: he's not Deng Xiaoping and he's not Mao. And he would, in a moment, if you could get him
[Guest]: to really talk to you personally on the Amit Verma show like this, I think he would confess
[Guest]: that he could not swing a deal necessarily as his predecessors, two or three of his predecessors
[Guest]: could have. So I think there is an elite there. They can have an impact. And, you know, the
[Guest]: thing about the elite is they're like the middle class. They connect upwards, sending
[Guest]: ideas and feelings and perceptions up to the rulership. And they communicate downwards
[Guest]: from the rulership to people below the elite, the masses, so-called ordinary folks. They're
[Guest]: a vital element of a society just like the middle classes. So they both shape and are
[Guest]: shaped by ideas. And I have no doubt that the elite there is a very powerful force.
[Amit Varma]: That's a very interesting point about Xi and, you know, Modi not being able to sell concessions
[Amit Varma]: to their people because, you know, in your book, you've mentioned Nehru and Mao and what
[Amit Varma]: magisterial personalities they are. But even there you point out that in circa 57, 58 or
[Amit Varma]: something like that, Nehru tried to push through his cabinet the proposal that the Chinese
[Amit Varma]: be allowed open access to Aksai Chin so that they could get in and out of Tibet easily.
[Amit Varma]: And this cabinet didn't let it go through. So eventually they allowed that access only
[Amit Varma]: for civilian purposes. And that kind of remains a problem even now. So even back then when
[Amit Varma]: these leaders were so strong and had the aura that they had, that there was a limit to how
[Amit Varma]: much they could get through. And this seems a good time to kind of ask that meta question
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, the constraint that politics holds upon actually having meaningful action
[Amit Varma]: forward like you talk about elite influence. Now, China, obviously, everything you said
[Amit Varma]: is very illuminating for me, because I don't know anything about China. But looking at
[Amit Varma]: India, I'm not sure it's true, because none of the political class have actually been
[Amit Varma]: educated by academics, despite, you know, Supreme Leader having a degree in entire political
[Amit Varma]: science. And if there's any university whose ideas they have imbibed, it's really WhatsApp
[Amit Varma]: University. And I'm kind of being flippant here. But it is also kind of true that when
[Amit Varma]: you look at the underpinnings of the things that drive these guys, I don't see any of
[Amit Varma]: that influence. For example, just today, and we are recording this on, let me check the
[Amit Varma]: date on my computer, I'm so bad. It's July 9. And just today, Meenakshi Lekhi, who's
[Amit Varma]: the new Minister of State for External Affairs, has said, quote, some have expertise in making
[Amit Varma]: the virus, some in making vaccines. Now, this is a very jingoistic and incendiary thing
[Amit Varma]: to say and totally not on for an external affairs minister, for God's sake, this is
[Amit Varma]: not how we want to talk. And as you pointed out in the book, a lot of the Chinese attitudes
[Amit Varma]: towards us are shaped by what they see in our media and how they interpret it. And when
[Amit Varma]: they see a minister talking like this, that some make the virus, some make the vaccine,
[Amit Varma]: it's just completely out of line. But this seems to me to be shaped by a certain kind
[Amit Varma]: of jingoistic nationalistic rhetoric, which is popular on WhatsApp, devoid of reality,
[Amit Varma]: something that no academic would support. And more and more, you get the sense that
[Amit Varma]: our politicians can kind of drive themselves into a corner. Now, it is okay that we have
[Amit Varma]: a skirmish with Pakistan. And you know, our leaders can sell the narrative that we did
[Amit Varma]: a surgical strike where they basically bomb a few rocks. But when it comes to China, it's
[Amit Varma]: a whole different ballgame. This kind of posturing can be extremely counterproductive, and just
[Amit Varma]: takes us into the wrong direction. And then it becomes like a vicious circle. So one,
[Amit Varma]: what would be your response to my counterpoint that, you know, even if there is some academic
[Amit Varma]: influence on the way say bureaucrats may think, it's not there in politics. And this force
[Amit Varma]: of domestic politics, this force of populism, and this particular kind of nationalism makes
[Amit Varma]: a lot of other things that we might talk about, Moot.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I don't want to suggest that, you know, everyone has read that political
[Guest]: science textbook or their economics textbook, and then, you know, really makes policy and
[Guest]: even constructs a worldview out of that necessarily, and very easily. But just does seem to me that,
[Guest]: you know, whether they acknowledge it or not, and sometimes they traduce what they learn,
[Guest]: I mean, saying stupid things, despite your training is something that we've all done,
[Guest]: including myself, I may know something intellectually, and then I've made all kinds of foolish remarks.
[Guest]: And I think politicians are exactly like that as well. And of course, they may be more prone
[Guest]: to display that because it might win them elections and so forth. But just still seems
[Guest]: to me that at least a good part of what they mouth and so on has come from some branch
[Guest]: of their training and thinking. And even what's mouthed on WhatsApp has come from people who
[Guest]: were educated at universities and high schools and so forth. So, I mean, I guess I'm giving
[Guest]: you a fairly prosaic answer, which is a literalist answer that, you know, you went through school
[Guest]: and college, and so you picked up a vocabulary, which then allows you to make certain kinds
[Guest]: of assertions and arguments, even on WhatsApp and in political life, which otherwise you
[Guest]: couldn't possibly make. But yeah, I mean, I suppose my sense is that it's true that
[Guest]: a little learning is worse than none. But on the whole, I would bet on education, university
[Guest]: education in particular, still bringing us to a place of some moderation and thoughtfulness
[Guest]: and progressiveness. And I wouldn't want a world where that possibility didn't exist.
[Guest]: So it may be that leaders and elites, or particularly political leaders, are not as well schooled
[Guest]: or as well educated as we academics would like, and they ignore their own training or
[Guest]: the best thoughts that we try to communicate to them and instill in them. But that's the
[Guest]: world, you know, and we as academics ourselves in our personal or micro social existences
[Guest]: don't always live by the thoughts that we espouse. So I'm a bit more forgiving of politicians
[Guest]: that way. Take nationalism, I mean, what else is nationalism, but, you know, a set of ideas
[Guest]: that probably almost certainly were put together by sort of academics themselves, first of
[Guest]: all, given the kind of modern shape that we today recognize as nationalism. If you trace
[Guest]: the origins of nationalism to things like the development of national languages, I mean,
[Guest]: Benedict Anderson, the famous historian, late historian, in his book, Imagined Communities,
[Guest]: talks about, you know, the role of the kind of nationalization of a language, which is
[Guest]: the dialects and so on were reduced and squeezed out. And mass education began to teach a standardized
[Guest]: script and grammar and language. And that's such a powerful kind of vehicle for nationalism.
[Guest]: It wasn't the only one. The book is much more interesting than that. But he does show that
[Guest]: as other theorists and nationalists. And, you know, that was philologists and grammarians,
[Guest]: who we would call academics, who did that. So, Ernest Renard, the historian, said that,
[Guest]: you know, nationalism becomes possible through forgetting. And historians are also part of
[Guest]: this forgetting. We band together as a people by forgetting some of the terrible things
[Guest]: our co-nationalists once did to us back in the day. And I think historians play a role
[Guest]: in that. They help us contextualize something that happened back in the day. We forget some
[Guest]: of the hurt and anger that our forebears may have had, because we see what happened in
[Guest]: some context, which is kind of a forgetting. We forget some part of the anger and the resentment
[Guest]: we feel because of this larger context within which certain decisions and episodes occurred.
[Guest]: And sometimes historians tell us that certain episodes that we think were central forget
[Guest]: about them, because actually that wasn't the biggest thing at that time. So, yeah, I think
[Guest]: historians have had a very big role in fostering this nationalism as well. I know we have historians
[Guest]: in India. I mean, I'm not part of Indian historiography and its study, but very national historians,
[Guest]: both of the right-wing and of the more liberal left-wing kind, who very much how we see nationalism
[Guest]: today came out of their writings. So, again, I would say, you know, whether politicians
[Guest]: understand it or not, they are mouthing the lines that academics have taught. And, you
[Guest]: know, I mean, I guess it brings me to the larger point, which is that academics have
[Guest]: an enormous responsibility. We can't keep criticizing politicians and lampooning them
[Guest]: and caricaturing them, because we have helped make those leaders. It's our ideas that are
[Guest]: being used out there, misused by politicians and other influencers. And we do have to be
[Guest]: careful, I think. And perhaps the best thing we can always do is insist that, you know,
[Guest]: well, if not a hundred flowers bloom, but a multiplicity of flowers are considered.
[Guest]: And in our pedagogy and in our classrooms, at least convey that spirit of, even if you
[Guest]: don't agree with something altogether, try and live that spirit of weighing up things
[Guest]: and telling the other story and all of that. So, I certainly wouldn't exculpate academics
[Guest]: from the things that are going wrong.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I have a couple of thoughts here. And one is about, you spoke about, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the importance of history and memory. And at an individual level, you know, one
[Amit Varma]: of my big learnings about memory, which I remember discussing also with Anshul Malhotra
[Amit Varma]: in an episode I did with her, she's written this lovely book on partition of people remembering
[Amit Varma]: through objects they've carried. And it's a big TIL learning about a memory for me,
[Amit Varma]: because how memory apparently works is that when we remember an event, the first time
[Amit Varma]: we remember an event, we remember the event. But the next time we remember it, we remember
[Amit Varma]: the remembering of the event, and so on in a case of Chinese whispers in our brain, which
[Amit Varma]: is why, you know, two people who shared the same experience can 10 years later remember
[Amit Varma]: it completely differently, because each remembering it has altered a bit because of so many other
[Amit Varma]: factors. And that seems to me to be the case, in a sense with a collective memory, also
[Amit Varma]: historical grievances that a lot of the grievances that we have that the Mughals did this, or
[Amit Varma]: so and so did this, or so and so did that, you know, I don't even see why they should
[Amit Varma]: be relevant to us in the modern day. But we have these simplistic history, which then
[Amit Varma]: create these simplistic sort of grievances, which feed into the things that we do today.
[Amit Varma]: And the other aspect of it is the aspect of where academics are important in sort of keeping
[Amit Varma]: the those dialogues and you know, that nuance alive, like you mentioned nationalism. Now,
[Amit Varma]: in the last episode I recorded with Pranay Kotasane, which is coming out after we are
[Amit Varma]: recording this, so it's not out yet. He spoke about how one of his favorite books is the
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi Tagore debates. And you have mentioned in your book, and I'll quote those lines where
[Amit Varma]: you write about how Gandhi and Tagore and one matter on which they agreed, viewed nationalism,
[Amit Varma]: where you have written, quote, especially for Tagore and Gandhi, nationalism is both
[Amit Varma]: emancipatory from colonial rule and oppressive. It encourages individuals to sacrifice their
[Amit Varma]: creativity and moral sense for the collective and to make excuses for social violence. States
[Amit Varma]: built on nationalism are inevitable, but for both Tagore and Gandhi, individual self-restraint
[Amit Varma]: and moral behavior are the key to peace and order. If you all respected certain norms
[Amit Varma]: of behavior towards each other, irrespective of nationality, governments and states would
[Amit Varma]: become largely irrelevant, stop quote. And it's a sort of a broad sort of view of nationalism,
[Amit Varma]: which encompasses more than, you know, our current narrow divisive visions of it. Let's
[Amit Varma]: come to the book, because otherwise, your publisher Chiki will get extremely upset if
[Amit Varma]: you don't discuss a book at all. So let's actually talk about this framework, which
[Amit Varma]: I found so fascinating, the four P's. So tell me a bit about the four P's. And how did you
[Amit Varma]: arrive at the framework? Did it happen over a period of years? Or did you start thinking
[Amit Varma]: about this book? And then, as you started making your notes, this came to you, how did
[Amit Varma]: it happen? And then, you know, we can begin with the first of the P's maybe.
[Guest]: Well, it happened with a fifth P, which is panic. I guess in conversation with Jagannath,
[Guest]: set myself such a big list of things I was saying earlier, you know, river water issues
[Guest]: with China, trade issues with China, our influence in third regions with China, Pakistan, another
[Guest]: P. And the list was just getting bigger and bigger. And I was getting more and more panicky,
[Guest]: because on some topics, I thought, oh, my gosh, if I have to cover all of these, first
[Guest]: of all, the length of the book, how will I accommodate them? But secondly, I'll either
[Guest]: write some pablum, another P, something so boring that, you know, everyone knows already,
[Guest]: or, you know, I would have enough to say. And some chapters will be humongous, like
[Guest]: the perimeters chapter, which is about the border into where, and in others, I'll be
[Guest]: muttering something for about four or five pages, and then I'll be done. And it'll look
[Guest]: very odd, the book will be imbalanced, you know. So out of that panic about, oh, my God,
[Guest]: the time was ticking. So I think about three or four weeks into the book, I began with
[Guest]: what I knew already, the perimeter, the border issue, that's where I started. So I thought
[Guest]: that would be chapter one, turned out to be chapter two, eventually. And I thought the
[Guest]: power chapter had to be done, obviously, weighing up the relative power of the two. So those
[Guest]: two were very clear. So I started in the Steve Cohen mode, just start writing, don't think
[Guest]: about it too much, start getting stuff on paper. So I started that way. And then I had
[Guest]: fingers crossed that other things would fall by the wayside or fall into place as I went
[Guest]: along. And I guess, in a way, that's what happened. Out of that panic and beginning
[Guest]: with what I knew, slowly it dawned on me that the length of these chapters, I was already
[Guest]: getting to the halfway point of the book, it didn't lend itself to too many more chapters.
[Guest]: So I had to start to squeeze down. And then I began to sort of just play it backwards
[Guest]: from what I knew to what I would declare to be a virtue, which is, you know, what did
[Guest]: I know best? And what could I write about that would be most interesting to me and possibly
[Guest]: to a reader, to what ought to be properly in the book, rather than some grand scheme.
[Guest]: And I just thought, yeah, something about the perceptions of the two societies towards
[Guest]: each other. And because Juggernaut had said, you're trying to infuse a bit of your own
[Guest]: personal experiences into it, I thought that's where the perceptions would come in. My trips
[Guest]: there, sometimes a conversation with some Chinese people or students or some visitors
[Guest]: from China, I could resurrect some of those episodes. So I thought a perceptions chapter
[Guest]: would get Juggernaut off my back there, where they would say, oh, my God, don't just narrate
[Guest]: all this thirdhand, but give us your firsthand experience of some stuff. So that started
[Guest]: to form itself as that chapter. And then, obviously, there's a geopolitical context
[Guest]: in which India, China interact. And that was the partnerships chapter, the fourth P. And
[Guest]: actually for myself, I think that's the least successful chapter of the book. I mean, that's
[Guest]: the one that ought to be my bread and butter, India, China, Russia, Soviet Union, USA. But
[Guest]: I don't know, I found it the most difficult to write. And I think it's the least successful.
[Guest]: I don't know, I almost think if I had it over, I would chuck it out. But you know, I think
[Amit Varma]: that's a curse of knowledge speaking that you know, the subject so well that you assume
[Amit Varma]: that you're stating the obvious and you're like, what is that? I'm just stating the obvious.
[Amit Varma]: But no, for a reader who doesn't know a lot of that, I would actually disagree. I'd say
[Amit Varma]: that. No, it's a great chapter. All of it is good. Of course, the perimeter chapter
[Amit Varma]: is the longest. But I guess one needs to go into that kind of detail, because they are
[Amit Varma]: the kind of concrete details that animate the relationship that we've had. Yeah. So
[Amit Varma]: for me, I, you know, you've almost framed your explanation of the book as if it is something
[Amit Varma]: you know, you're responding to this from the publisher, that from the publisher, I will
[Amit Varma]: just assure my listeners that it doesn't read like that at all. I would never have guessed
[Amit Varma]: that it feels very self contained and just an excellent systematic building of a frame
[Amit Varma]: to look at China. But I'm sorry, I interrupted you because I felt that I had to disagree
[Amit Varma]: with your pejorative view of your own excellent chapter. Do continue.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I think the one way of saving that account that I just gave you this rather disjointed
[Guest]: as it actually happens, existential account is to maybe draw an analogy to personal life,
[Guest]: you know, why these four. So if you do that, I mean, the first thing you can say is that
[Guest]: how we relate to another person is refracted or, or affected by how we perceive each other.
[Guest]: So we have some perceptions of each other that grow and chop and change and form themselves.
[Guest]: And we can't even quite account for why we may think about people in certain ways. But
[Guest]: that has a very powerful framing effect. So I think that's one justification for putting
[Guest]: the perceptions chapter in there and putting it up front, a more kind of conceptual way
[Guest]: of talking about these four P's. Although, I mean, drawing this analogy to individuals
[Guest]: is not a very good way to think about social affairs. But it's one way of kind of just,
[Guest]: you know, giving it some respectability, I think, and communicating to your listeners
[Guest]: about why these four are important. The second piece is perimeters. So the analogy there
[Guest]: in our personal lives is, of course, you know, to my neighbor, to others, you've got to respect
[Guest]: my property, which is territory in geopolitics or international affairs, but my home and
[Guest]: hearth, my belongings. I mean, if you try to steal them, if you try to break them, if
[Guest]: you violate them, we've got a fight on our hands here. And I will defend them to the
[Guest]: death, presumably. So, of course, perimeters matters because our property matters in personal
[Guest]: life, and we will fight for those. The third P is partnership. So that's friendships. My
[Guest]: friends' friends are my friends. My enemies' friends may be my enemies. My enemies' enemies
[Guest]: may be my friends. That's true in personal life, I think. You know, at least it's the
[Guest]: first clue or gesture. If my friend introduces me to their friend, the chances are I'm going
[Guest]: to be congenial towards them. If my enemy introduces me to their friend, I might look
[Guest]: sideways and suspiciously at that third person, et cetera. So I think, again, partnerships
[Guest]: are important and undergird that, you know, they come from that sense that our larger
[Guest]: network of sort of connections has a role in whether we are friends with someone else
[Guest]: or not. And we learn from third parties. If we're friends with X, and they say Y is a
[Guest]: bad person, and Y is my neighbor, then I might suddenly start to look at Y in a jaundiced
[Guest]: way, because X who has had some other experience of Y that he or she narrates to me, and so
[Guest]: on. And the fourth is power. So, of course, all our individual relationships are mediated
[Guest]: by power at some level, some more than others. And again, the relationship between countries
[Guest]: turns on relative power as well. So, I mean, I would say that that's four more formal arguments,
[Guest]: if you'd accept the analogy to individuals and their relationships, that made me think
[Guest]: that I was on a bit more solid ground. I wrote it not that way, a bit more conceptually.
[Guest]: And then my publisher said, this will bore everyone to tears. Chuck it out. And I did.
[Guest]: And I think they were right. And that's why I dismissed other P's and other aspects of
[Guest]: the relationship, such as water, such as Pakistan, such as influence in third regions, and trade,
[Guest]: and so on. And I said, those are more effect than cause. So they become problems between
[Guest]: India and Pakistan because of some fundamental conflict. It's not that they are the cause
[Guest]: of the conflict. I don't think Pakistan caused the India-Pakistan conflict. It's that the
[Guest]: China-India conflict caused Beijing to reach out to Pakistan, and that drew Pakistan into
[Guest]: the India-China conflict more and more. So I think sometimes we are mixing up cause and
[Guest]: effect. And of course, at some point, effect becomes cause in a further loop. So I don't
[Guest]: deny that sometimes what Pakistan does with China then affects India-China relations.
[Guest]: But to give the book a succinctness and a direction, I decided to go with these four
[Guest]: P's and just make it more readable for the ordinary reader.
[Amit Varma]: No, the four P's, to my mind, do strike me as sort of a foundational frame to look at
[Amit Varma]: the relationship, as you correctly pointed out, Pakistan, whatever is happening, there
[Amit Varma]: is more effect than cause. And I love this quote from your book where you quote the former
[Amit Varma]: Prime Minister Yusuf Jilani, talking about Pakistan's relationship with China. And he
[Amit Varma]: describes it as quote, higher than mountains, deeper than the ocean, stronger than steel
[Amit Varma]: and sweeter than honey, stop quote, which is incredibly romantic. Let's move on to the
[Amit Varma]: first of the P's now. Your first chapter is called perceptions from regard to disdain.
[Amit Varma]: And that does indeed seem to be the movement. It's a bit more nuanced and that of course,
[Amit Varma]: it wasn't always regard and it isn't necessarily just disdain now. But you know, as you point
[Amit Varma]: out, for about 15 years out of the 70, we had great relationships, especially in the
[Amit Varma]: early 50s, mid 50s, Hindi Chini Bhai Bhai and Nehru overflowing with goodwill, almost
[Amit Varma]: like Mr. Jilani towards China. And then it gradually began to go downhill. But you kind
[Amit Varma]: of go a little deeper into history, into the past, into the kind of interactions we've
[Amit Varma]: had through the centuries, which also I found very interesting because, you know, growing
[Amit Varma]: up what I've been taught in school or what is there in the popular literature, we know
[Amit Varma]: enough about India's troubled history with those who colonised us and our history with,
[Amit Varma]: you know, those who invaded us or those who visited and so on. But China is just kind
[Amit Varma]: of mentioned in footnotes, you know, even though they are our immediate neighbour, like
[Amit Varma]: we'll, you know, know of Hunsang and Fahain and all that, which we read in our school
[Amit Varma]: books with a different spelling than the ones you've used, which I assume are more authentic,
[Amit Varma]: if we don't know much more about them. But actually, the truth is that India, China have
[Amit Varma]: had in terms of people to people contacts, pretty deep relationships for centuries. So
[Amit Varma]: can you, you know, briefly give me a sense of sort of this historical journey of the
[Amit Varma]: contacts we have and how they shaped our perceptions of each other.
[Guest]: So I think the story really begins with Buddhism. I mean, I'm sure there was contact before
[Guest]: then, but I think most people begin the story there. And so did I, I mean, I'm not a historian
[Guest]: of India, China, but just picking up the synthetic material that's out there and rendering it
[Guest]: for readers. So you begin with Buddhism, which actually probably almost certainly went from
[Guest]: Central Asia to China first, not from India, as I think we sometimes think. And so it was
[Guest]: indirectly from India, but not directly. The Indian influence comes later, when particularly
[Guest]: I think Chinese pilgrims and monks and so on came to India to receive wisdom and to
[Guest]: pick up texts and practices and take them back to China. And then some Indian monks
[Guest]: and Buddhists went there to help translate and communicate and so on. So, I mean, from
[Guest]: that time forwards to roughly, I would say the 10th century, very broadly, crudely, you
[Guest]: could say that China had regard for India. And even there, as I try to show, China did
[Guest]: have a sense of its own kind of importance. And there were certainly segments in China,
[Guest]: the elite people around the court, who at various times reacted quite negatively to
[Guest]: Buddhism. And in effect, you know, they were able to accept Buddhism by synthesizing it.
[Guest]: I mean, so they weren't negative towards India necessarily, but they wanted to synthesize
[Guest]: it. And there were elements that claimed, you know, that Buddhism was actually a Chinese
[Guest]: religion originally, the Buddha was Chinese, etc, etc, that it was actually, you know,
[Guest]: synonymous with Daoism and things like that. I think, nonetheless, the broad story is that
[Guest]: until about the 10th century or so, China had a regard for India through Buddhism. There
[Guest]: was trade, there was other stuff going on, particularly in Buddhist relics and things
[Guest]: like that, and in Chinese goods coming to India. But it was born out of Buddhism and
[Guest]: the learning associated with it and practices. But at about that time, which is about 1000
[Guest]: of the Christian era, Buddhism was more or less ending in India. And, you know, Brahmanism
[Guest]: or whatever you want to call it, made a pushback. And in a sense, I mean, I think this is what
[Guest]: came out of one of the seminars I was in after the book, Buddhism became naturalized as a
[Guest]: kind of part of Hinduism. So it didn't die in the sense that it was completely vanquished
[Guest]: and obliterated. It just became a part of the pantheon of Hinduism. You know, so you
[Guest]: have Buddhism as another god in the Hindu pantheon. And so, but as a result of that,
[Guest]: I think the Chinese pilgrimages to India, and the looking up to India kind of began
[Guest]: to die. If China began to export Buddhism to parts of East Asia, and even parts of Southeast
[Guest]: Asia, and perhaps look for Buddhist interactions and influences elsewhere, and develop their
[Guest]: own Buddhist thought. And by the 15th century, I would say, and somewhat earlier, the tables
[Guest]: were turned, as it were, and in the parts of India, began to look up to China, to the
[Guest]: Chinese court, the Chinese imperial domains, and parts of Malabar, southern India, where
[Guest]: there was a lot of trade, and where the great Chinese admiral, Cheng He, visited. And before
[Guest]: that, you know, the great Khan, I mean, there were kingdoms in Bengal, that also were sending
[Guest]: tribute to China. So, you know, I think the relationship was somewhat reversed. There
[Guest]: are parts of India that began to look up to China, and perhaps even to some extent fear
[Guest]: China. And there was some interference by the Cheng He's and so on in Indian affairs.
[Guest]: And even going back to Harshvardhan's time in northern India, there was a kind of Chinese
[Guest]: military expedition that was sent to India, to take some amount of revenge and sort out
[Guest]: some of the affairs of some, you know, at the time of Harshvardhan and so on, when some
[Guest]: Chinese envoys had been humiliated and killed. So, you know, there was a kind of fear and
[Guest]: respect for China at that point. Then there's a hiatus in a way, I mean, there was trade
[Guest]: increasingly, there was contacts between Indians and Chinese in third regions, Southeast Asia
[Guest]: elsewhere. But colonialism, Western colonialism arrived. And I think increasingly, the relationship
[Guest]: was mediated through the Portuguese, the Dutch, and increasingly by the British. The opium
[Guest]: trade began with between India and China. And out of that, and increasing colonial influence
[Guest]: in China, the century of humiliation and all of that, the Chinese looked at India with
[Guest]: two kind of jaundiced eyes. The first was, you know, they looked at Indians in China,
[Guest]: the policemen, the Indian troops that were being used by the British, some elements of
[Guest]: Indian traders in China, of course, the opium trade, which clearly had a very bad effect
[Guest]: amongst a segment of Chinese people. You know, so that led them to a kind of negative perception
[Guest]: of India and Indian society. And associated with that was the question amongst a group
[Guest]: of Chinese reformists, who were Republicans, mostly, and were trying to reform China. And
[Guest]: the question they asked was, and this is what I recount, you know, how come this great civilization
[Guest]: west of China, we think of China as a northern country, but they think of us as being in
[Guest]: their west. How had this great civilization fallen on hard times? Why did it fall to the
[Guest]: British? And this was asked at a time when China was going under. So, you know, they
[Guest]: wanted to figure out how such a big landmass, huge population, vibrant civilization had
[Guest]: fallen to a handful of imperialists and remained under their jackboot. So, the answer they
[Guest]: came up with was, in a way, a pretty familiar one, one that we tell ourselves in India.
[Guest]: They didn't fight hard enough, the Indians. They were disunited. They had been driven
[Guest]: by and developed a psychology of being disunited by waves of invasion. They were not able to
[Guest]: mount a, you know, a united kind of response to invaders. That different groups played
[Guest]: out their animosities through these invaders, including the British, and they wanted to
[Guest]: settle scores with other Indians rather than keep the foreigners out, et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest]: And one abiding image was India was a country of many castes and religions and hopelessly
[Guest]: pluralistic and divided, and they were a kind of Luan people. Luan means sort of chaotic.
[Guest]: There was no center there, and this society was therefore hopeless and could not mount
[Guest]: an effective response. And China, there were signs that China could become that, and it
[Guest]: should never become India. So, they drew a negative lesson from India that China should
[Guest]: not become that, and that's not a very pretty picture of India.
[Guest]: So, by the late 19th century, their view of India was rather negative for all these reasons.
[Guest]: And then fast forward, of course, you know, to the Nehruvian period and Mao and the Communist
[Guest]: Party come to power. I think there were elements of that that still hung around. I mean, you're
[Guest]: right that there was also an appreciation of India even now. Mao continued to famously
[Guest]: say apparently that, you know, if a Chinese person was ever born again, they should be
[Guest]: born Indian. It's some sort of quite well-known statement amongst the Chinese. So, there was
[Guest]: a kind of regard, and of course, the admirers of Tagore and so on that I mentioned in the
[Guest]: book had an admiration of India, and I don't want to deny all that.
[Guest]: But I would say on the whole, you know, by the Nehruvian period and beyond, there began
[Guest]: to be a kind of looking down the nose at India. And to tell the Indian side of the story,
[Guest]: I mean, I guess it developed also, although I don't do enough of that in the book, I just
[Guest]: didn't have time and I don't have enough access to it, but also perhaps both a regard for
[Guest]: China that was there, but also in the modern period, a kind of negative view of China,
[Guest]: partly racist that we learned through the British and the Westerners. They were yellow
[Guest]: people with strange ways and, you know, consumed by drugs like opium and so on and so forth,
[Guest]: more arrogant and warlike, again, learned from the West, you know, so I think mutual
[Guest]: disdain was the story and elements of that remain the case.
[Amit Varma]: So a few asides from this historical journey, like one part I found fascinating was where
[Amit Varma]: you write about how when Buddhism first came to China, it wasn't entirely smooth, there
[Amit Varma]: was a little bit of friction and its acceptance and many people fought back because they said,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Taoism and Confucianism, they are our natural distinct, but then as Buddhism
[Amit Varma]: declined in India itself, they kind of appropriated it and it just became like a third prong.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that, you know, what you just mentioned here, I don't remember
[Amit Varma]: reading it in the book that they tried to paint Buddhism as a religion that originated
[Amit Varma]: in China. We've kind of seen a similar thing in India where, for example, the wacky quote
[Amit Varma]: unquote historian P.N. Oak, he would write about how Christianity originated in India
[Amit Varma]: and Jesus Christ was Indian and Christianity was originally called Krishna Niti. And this
[Amit Varma]: is the same guy who, by the way, said the Taj Mahal was originally Tejo Mahalaya. So
[Amit Varma]: I don't know, you know, whether this is whether these ancient civilizations have this kind
[Amit Varma]: of inferiority complex that they need to make up these kind of stories to sort of make themselves
[Amit Varma]: feel better about the influences coming in. And speaking of influences coming in, there's
[Amit Varma]: also a nice section on trade where you talk about the opium trade and you point out that
[Amit Varma]: we would give them opium and in return, one of the products that we would take is white
[Amit Varma]: sugar, which we therefore call Chini, you know, Chini because Chini is fairly obvious.
[Amit Varma]: So all you Indian nationalists listening to this who feel glad that TikTok has been banned
[Amit Varma]: kindly stop eating Chini also, which is actually good for the health. I mean, if you stop eating
[Amit Varma]: it, that'll be good for the health. So that's one way that xenophobia may actually work
[Amit Varma]: for you. Now, the other interesting thing that strikes me with this disdain is and that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you point out about how in the late 19th century, they lose the war to Japan.
[Amit Varma]: And you write about how young reformers in China are now saying that, listen, we need
[Amit Varma]: to be more like Japan, Russia and Germany. And the country whose fate we need to avoid
[Amit Varma]: is India. And as you point out, an implication that the yellow races are as talented as the
[Amit Varma]: white but not the case with other races. And you quote from this very interesting article,
[Amit Varma]: I think it's a 1906 article, a series of articles, which is called the causes for the demise
[Amit Varma]: of India. And in that article, the author writes, quote, the word India is in fact nothing
[Amit Varma]: but a name from history. Ah, yeah, their land is all smashed to pieces. This brown race
[Amit Varma]: will be forever enslaved. Looking at China today, it is like India in the past. As a
[Amit Varma]: matter of principle, it was the Indians who brought about the demise of India. The character
[Amit Varma]: of the race is chaotic, their language is topsy turvy, their religions all separate
[Amit Varma]: from each other. There is no unified spirit, no patriotic thinking, the elites are drowning
[Amit Varma]: themselves in song and dance and know nothing of great purpose. Alas, India is lost, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote. And later you point out sort of a similar tendency when Tagore visits in 1924. And there
[Amit Varma]: are small groups of people who welcome him and give him the respect he deserves. But
[Amit Varma]: you also point out, quote, he was roundly denounced and ridiculed, particularly by leftist
[Amit Varma]: communist revolutionaries old and young, including former admirers and translators. He was seen
[Amit Varma]: as extolling traditional feudal Asia and romanticizing the Orient against the material industrial
[Amit Varma]: Occident, stop quote. And later you quote Ram Guha, quoting the Chinese scholar Wu
[Amit Varma]: Qin Hui, and forgive me if I get the pronunciation wrong, where Wu Qin Hui says of Tagore, quote,
[Amit Varma]: Mr. Tagore, a petrified fossil of India's national past, had retreated into the tearful
[Amit Varma]: eyes and dripping noses of the slave people as a conquered country, seeking happiness
[Amit Varma]: in a future life, squeaking like the hub of a wagon wheel that needs oil, stop quote,
[Amit Varma]: all of which lovely little snippets. Now, my kind of question here is, and we've also
[Amit Varma]: obviously at different times had sort of xenophobic views of them. You talk about how a lot of
[Amit Varma]: Chinese came to Calcutta, settled there, especially in the Babazar area, the sort of frictions
[Amit Varma]: that would often be there. But the other thing that I wonder about is, how much are contemporary
[Amit Varma]: frictions or contemporary impressions shaped by things that happened in this distant past?
[Amit Varma]: Like do these sort of narratives that are there in the popular culture, actually carry
[Amit Varma]: on as a kind of oral history from father to child and so on all the way down so that one
[Amit Varma]: generation will, in some way without knowing it by osmosis replicate the attitude of like
[Amit Varma]: five generations ago? Or do some narratives just naturally get lost to history? And it
[Amit Varma]: is the imperatives of a future time that they are perhaps revived in some way?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think that, you know, you're right to shine the light on this issue of whether
[Guest]: these negative views and disdain and so on, going back to the 19th century, still really
[Guest]: alive and kicking in China. And likewise, whether elements of racism and so on, on our
[Guest]: side too, and negative pictures of China persist from, you know, long ago, or even whether
[Guest]: the regard remains on both sides and still affects us. I mean, I suppose I think they
[Guest]: do. I mean, that's the whole premise of the chapter in a way, is that the something of
[Guest]: that as a vestige, at least remains, some sort of collective consciousness is handed
[Guest]: down from one generation to another. And they, they can be in very seemingly innocent, popular
[Guest]: remarks and things, you know, Indian people are like this, or Chinese people are like
[Guest]: that. So there are these tropes that are out there even now, you know, and I mean, very
[Guest]: good natured Chinese have said, Oh, you Indians are also talkative and argumentative, to pick
[Guest]: up Sen's word about Indians. That's there from somewhere. It may not necessarily be
[Guest]: from, you know, received from or mediated through British influences. After all, they
[Guest]: had their own popular kind of encounters with Indians who were in China. And likewise, I
[Guest]: mean, Indians who had some contact with the Chinese here and there, might very well have
[Guest]: kind of concluded that the elements of Chinese culture that seem strange and not so nice
[Guest]: I mean, an extreme materialism is, I can't think, I suppose, a particular kind of trope
[Guest]: or image that a lot of people have towards China. And I think there's an associated in
[Guest]: India with a view that they're somehow very violent people, and can be very cruel or,
[Guest]: you know, despotic. And I don't know quite where that comes from. But maybe it came from
[Guest]: Indians who were also involved in the trade in China, might have run into troubles there,
[Guest]: or soldiers that served there, and brought back some stories. We know now from a recent
[Guest]: diary, of course, a different view. I forget the name of the diary that has been written
[Guest]: by this Indian sepoy, which has now been translated and made available, which shows that actually
[Guest]: there was a very great regard for his Chinese hosts, that he admired the ordinary Chinese
[Guest]: people and their struggles against colonials. But yeah, I mean, I think overall, there's
[Guest]: probably some basis for, you know, the kind of pictures we still have of each other. And
[Guest]: just like in personal psychology, I mean, you may be early in your life, you receive
[Guest]: certain kinds of cliches and prejudices from your parents and those around you. But your
[Guest]: own experience gradually as an adult, gives you some more. And I suppose, in the life
[Guest]: of a nation, that's true, too. So the 62 war, the terrible problems of the border, the sense
[Guest]: of mutual betrayal on Tibet, you know, those kinds of things, in turn, has only amplified
[Guest]: some original kinds of bad feelings on both sides over time. So I, you know, the reason
[Guest]: that chapter is there first is because I wanted to show that over time, we do have evidence
[Guest]: of these kinds of, at least ambivalences on both sides. And, you know, one section of
[Guest]: the book in the modern period, I worked through three books, Vikram Seth's book of his travels
[Guest]: through China, you know, it's Chinese views of India through Indian eyes. So Vikram Seth
[Guest]: looking at interacting with Chinese people on his bus journey and all of that, and giving
[Guest]: us a sense of how the Chinese look at India. And then this lady in Singapore, who I met
[Guest]: Anurag Vishwanath, who over many years did research there, how she encountered Chinese
[Guest]: people in China, and sometimes how they looked at India. And then lastly, Reshma Patil, the
[Guest]: Hindustan Times correspondent in Beijing, and this very nice book she wrote, also recounting
[Guest]: many stories of how the Chinese people looked at India. So I use that section to show how
[Guest]: even now, I mean, from Vikram Seth's journey was in the early 80s or late 70s, through
[Guest]: Anurag Vishwanath's journeys, which are through over many years up to a contemporary period,
[Guest]: and then Reshma's just seven, eight years ago. But there is a thread there of negative
[Guest]: views of India, but also some approbatory or positive views of India. So this ambivalence,
[Guest]: at least, is quite deeply there, you know, and I don't have so much data on the Indian
[Guest]: side, though I tell a few stories there. But I'm sure that there's a research project waiting
[Guest]: to be done there, of mining Indian perceptions of China, even in the modern period after
[Guest]: the 62 war, in novels or, you know, commentary, and stories of individual kind of encounters
[Guest]: with Chinese people that we could put together. My guess is that both sides are at fault there,
[Guest]: if that's the word. There are bad perceptions and some good perceptions on both sides.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and they come through in these books you mentioned, like in Vikram Seth's book,
[Amit Varma]: From Heaven Lake, he writes about how he needed to get a permit to visit Tibet. And one thing
[Amit Varma]: that enabled that was he discussed Awara with the Chinese official who was supposed to give
[Amit Varma]: him the permit because they were big fans of Bollywood. And similarly, in counter view
[Amit Varma]: to that is in Reshma's book, she writes about how, you know, she sort of asked the Chinese
[Amit Varma]: broadcasting executive she meets about his views of India. And there are these two really
[Amit Varma]: pithy lines which say so much, quote, children in India are naked, they piss on the streets,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote, which is such a succinct way of just, you know, putting the impression of
[Amit Varma]: a country. And then apparently he added, but all Indians have inner peace, which is like
[Amit Varma]: a kind of a backhanded compliment. So I love these. And of course, you know, these three
[Amit Varma]: books contain kind of, I guess, impressionistic accounts. And you've presented a lot more
[Amit Varma]: systematic data on Chinese perceptions of India. There's Simon Shen's 2011 survey,
[Amit Varma]: there's a survey Shen did with Debashish Roy Choudhury, where you wrote about their survey.
[Amit Varma]: At a broad level, they found that the Indian media's coverage of military affairs is marked
[Amit Varma]: by shrill jingoism and distrust, reflecting the paranoia at the heart of India's elite
[Amit Varma]: perceptions. The Chinese media is more sober because it is under the watchful eye of the
[Amit Varma]: government. But it has increased its coverage of India and feeds off what it reads in the
[Amit Varma]: Indian media to produce its own brand of self-righteous anxieties, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this kind of worried me because then you feel that this might be a vicious circle forming
[Amit Varma]: itself where, you know, the jingoism on each side is leading to increased reactive jingoism
[Amit Varma]: from the other side. The other fascinating part of this chapter, and there's much within
[Amit Varma]: this chapter alone that is fascinating, leave alone the rest of the book, is when you talk
[Amit Varma]: about the three Indian worldviews and the three Chinese worldviews. So would you like to briefly
[Amit Varma]: go through them? Because, you know, one of the conclusions that you later come to, and
[Amit Varma]: it struck me, is that out of all these six worldviews, the three Indian and the three
[Amit Varma]: Chinese, there is only one which, you know, can actually work for a positive future for
[Amit Varma]: all of us. And that is the least likely to happen. So just take us through these worldviews.
[Guest]: Yeah. So beginning with the Chinese, let's just begin there. I mean, I said they have
[Guest]: three. I mean, obviously, there are probably more, but these are three big ones. The first
[Guest]: is this idea of Tianxia, all under heaven, which is really the kind of view of China
[Guest]: at the heart of the world and certainly of Asia. And mostly we know it as the tributary
[Guest]: system. China sits in the middle, and there are all these smaller powers around it historically,
[Guest]: and they send tribute to China. The tributary system had then China give something back,
[Guest]: and generally it's accepted that the Chinese emperor gave back more than he received in
[Guest]: the form of legitimacy to these smaller countries, sometimes interfering in their affairs to,
[Guest]: you know, prop up rulers who wanted his help, and of course, mostly opening up Chinese markets
[Guest]: to their exports. But this Tianxia system, if we go from that, then where is India in
[Guest]: that worldview? India is another potential tributary, basically. And now, having said
[Guest]: that, obviously, if you were Chinese looking at these tributaries around China, India is
[Guest]: the biggest tributary by far. So, I mean, the Chinese are not foolish. Certainly India,
[Guest]: and this is a thought experiment. I mean, I have to ask Chinese people this, but
[Guest]: proceeding from this Tianxia view, India would be the biggest of the tributaries,
[Guest]: and therefore it had to be given a certain kind of special position amongst the tributaries.
[Guest]: It would be grander and deserving of a more respect and autonomy. But certainly, all
[Guest]: tributaries were in a subordinate position, ultimately. So India appears there at best as
[Guest]: a kind of junior partner. Then there's the kind of communist worldview and the republican worldview,
[Guest]: where, you know, this Tianxia and all that is thrown out. The empire is dismantled. The
[Guest]: emperor is bid adieu, made into an ordinary human being. And what replaces it is communism
[Guest]: and basically a republican view, which is that people, by merit, will rule the country,
[Guest]: either the republican view of the Kuomintang or the Communist Party. So there, I mean,
[Guest]: again, you can see, let's just take the communists. The Chinese communists certainly thought that,
[Guest]: you know, the great fight was with capitalism. Who would lead that fight? Well, the great centers
[Guest]: of communism would enlist all the minor socialist and like-minded oppressed people
[Guest]: and lead the fight. And very quickly, Mao decided that the Soviet Union under Khrushchev,
[Guest]: he was a kind of, you know, he was too weak and cowardly. And the fallout with the Soviet Union
[Guest]: at that time was that they were too cooperative with the West. And therefore, it was actually
[Guest]: China that would be the leading edge of the revolutionary struggle with capitalism. Where
[Guest]: would India appear in that? I mean, if the Chinese accepted, as some did, that eventually,
[Guest]: not initially, that India could be a kind of ally, that it was a sort of socialist aspiring country,
[Guest]: that it was not altogether, you know, a petty bourgeois, also ran, you know, a sort of running
[Guest]: dog of imperialism, then India could be admitted again as a junior ideological partner and
[Guest]: revolutionary partner of China. China would lead the struggle and provide leadership and
[Guest]: backing to these minor powers. But India would not lead the struggle. India might, more than some
[Guest]: other centers of socialism and resistance, be a partner, but a junior partner. The third is,
[Guest]: of course, as China exited communism, mostly, the third great worldview is China's a great power.
[Guest]: And there, too, China now, the only peer it recognizes is the United States. And if the
[Guest]: China dream is correct, then under Xi Jinping, then China will be not just the peer, it will be
[Guest]: the superior. It will be the hegemon. It will be the greatest power on earth. And even the Americans
[Guest]: will be in second place. So where is India in that? I mean, very charitably, the Indians hardly
[Guest]: see India as a great power. At best, they sort of see India as a aspiring power. Sometimes they
[Guest]: call us an important power with a role in world affairs, very grudgingly. And even that's a kind
[Guest]: of backhanded compliment. So in all three worldviews, India appears as a secondary junior
[Guest]: partner at best, and maybe even ignorable at worst. So the Indian worldviews, likewise, if we
[Guest]: go from this sort of mandala picture from Kautilya, well, there, I mean, China is a neighbor,
[Guest]: and your neighbor is your enemy and should be conquered. And then, you know, the Vishwaguru,
[Guest]: or before that, the Chakravartin, keeps expanding and takes dharma to successive entities that it
[Guest]: conquers. But not even in the greatest Indian fantasy can one imagine Indian armies, even in
[Guest]: the past, really, traversing the Himalayas into the great flat plains of Tibet, and then moving
[Guest]: on and conquering China. So the mandala system, the best that can be imagined, is that India
[Guest]: cultivates your neighbors' neighbors, and they become your friends. But that doesn't work too
[Guest]: well for India, because if you follow the logic through, then the Russians should be our friends
[Guest]: against the Chinese. But they've cut a deal with the Chinese, at least contemporaneously,
[Guest]: and become the junior partners of the Chinese against the West, because their mandala is,
[Guest]: or whatever their strategic, you know, kind of system is, is that the West is the bigger problem.
[Guest]: They look westwards. Their neighbor that's threatening is the West, and the Chinese are,
[Guest]: you know, the enemy's enemy, and so their friend. And India no longer really appears very important
[Guest]: to them. So then Japan is a neighbor's neighbor. But Japan is separated from the great landmass
[Guest]: of China by water. The stopping power of water prevents Japan playing a very big role on the
[Guest]: landmass and can't help India out too much. So in the mandala scheme, the only people who can help
[Guest]: India is, by extension, the West. And not surprisingly, America and the Western powers are
[Guest]: our enemy's enemy, who become our friends. But in all of that, you know, China doesn't,
[Guest]: never appears as a friend. Then if you look at the second worldview, which is the worldview of,
[Guest]: kind of, India as, from the perspective of cosmopolitanism. You see, I almost forgot my
[Guest]: own book. In this cosmopolitan Nehruvian-Tagore vision, see, that's the most soft-eyed,
[Guest]: twinkly-eyed view of China as a fellow Asian civilization. It's a viewpoint where nationalism
[Guest]: doesn't count for so much. In fact, nationalism beyond a point might be the problem. Then it's
[Guest]: India looking at China through a different lens, as another potential civilizational partner,
[Guest]: or another part, another civilization that deserves respect, that one can learn from,
[Guest]: work with, et cetera, et cetera. And that's a worldview that can accommodate China,
[Guest]: that can look at China as a friend, as a kin, through softer eyes. But then we come to India's
[Guest]: third worldview, which is our great power view. And actually, here I club Nehru and Golwalkar,
[Guest]: you know, the RSS supremo, in one bag, because I don't think Gandhi and Tagore would have talked
[Guest]: about India as a great power. That wasn't their kind of vocabulary. But Nehru partook of that
[Guest]: vocabulary, and Golwalkar did as well. So in that worldview, then China is a rival.
[Guest]: And it's not geography that makes China a rival. It's the fact, so that's, you know,
[Guest]: that's a mandala theory. But this great power view is that China's a rival because it's another great
[Guest]: power. You see, just in that worldview, even the United States would be a challenge to India
[Guest]: because it's another great power. So China, from this great power view, is that, well, great powers
[Guest]: can never be really good friends. Although in Nehru, you know, you said earlier that he had this
[Guest]: kind of nice view of China and a romantic view, but he also always had a doubt and worry about
[Guest]: China as another great power. And some of his views are almost racist as well. And Golwalkar too,
[Guest]: you know, wrote sometimes about China in a very bad way. And the book that he wrote it in has,
[Guest]: you know, you can't buy that book. It's been taken away and hidden by the RSS and so on.
[Guest]: So, you know, both of them, with their own great power view, could not look at China as anything
[Guest]: but a kind of a rival, although their view was slightly different about where the rivalry came
[Guest]: from. So you're right. The only, out of these six worldviews, three Chinese and three Indian,
[Guest]: the only nice one was the Gandhi and Tagore one. Gandhi didn't know China that well, I think,
[Guest]: just my sense of it. I don't know enough about his writings on China. But Tagore, of course,
[Guest]: knew it much better. And then, you know, he started Chinabavan and the whole attempt to
[Guest]: bring Chinese and Indian aesthetics and artists and writers and intellectuals together.
[Guest]: You know, those were the only two who could really have a very nice accommodative kin view of China.
[Guest]: And yet, as I point out, and you reminded me, that those are the only two who today,
[Guest]: where do those worldviews figure? I mean, there's the obvious, you know, October 2 view of Gandhi,
[Guest]: which even the right wing plays up. But there's no great affection or, you know,
[Guest]: kind of partaking of Gandhi and thought beyond the point in India anymore. I mean, it's an
[Guest]: obligatory schoolboy view, father of the nation view, but not a real engagement with Gandhi
[Guest]: and his values. And likewise, where is Tagore today? I mean, and his thoughts about post
[Guest]: nationalism or a worldview transcending nationalism. Again, sadly, I think probably
[Amit Varma]: really not there very much. Yeah, and it's very interesting that you should, you know,
[Amit Varma]: talk of Nehru and Golwalkar at the same breath. Like I often say that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Modi for all his rants against the Congress and the family is actually very Nehruvian and his
[Amit Varma]: top down vision of how the state should rule society, and is very much like Indira in his
[Amit Varma]: unquenching will to power as it were, and the desire to do anything to get there, that whole
[Amit Varma]: oppressiveness and authoritarianism that comes from him. But Nehru and Golwalkar is an interesting
[Amit Varma]: sort of connection there in this context as well. Let's let's kind of talk about perimeters there.
[Amit Varma]: And I found that chapter really fascinating. And I have actually covered elements of it in
[Amit Varma]: previous episodes with Manoj Kevalramani, Hamsini Hariharan and Shivani Mehta. I've done a bunch of
[Amit Varma]: these episodes. But nevertheless, briefly, give us a sense of what actually happens. Like at one
[Amit Varma]: point, you'll talk about, I'll quote from your book, because I found this a very illuminating
[Amit Varma]: paragraph to which kind of sums a lot of things up, where you write, quote,
[Amit Varma]: in the 1950s, both saw the other as insincere and stubborn in the border discussions.
[Amit Varma]: They concluded that the other had failed to honor commitments on Tibet. And they came to regard the
[Amit Varma]: other as militarily aggressive and themselves as militarily defensive. Having said that now and then
[Amit Varma]: the differences on the border did narrow, they agreed on the status of Tibet in 1950, 51 and 54.
[Amit Varma]: And they tried to avoid escalatory military actions. So it seems to me that one at a level
[Amit Varma]: of where their posturing is that this belongs to us and that belongs to us. There's absolutely no
[Amit Varma]: way that there is a common ground there that if you know, one army is an exposition, which the
[Amit Varma]: other country claims belongs to them, it will be viewed as an act of aggression by one and as an
[Amit Varma]: act of defense by the other. And there's no getting around that. Yet it seems for decades for large
[Amit Varma]: parts of our history, there was a certain practicality about how far you can push these
[Amit Varma]: differences, whether at Aksai Chin or Arunachal or whatever. And there weren't skirmishes. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: at one point, there was a proposal of doing a kind of a swap. So tell me a little bit more about sort
[Amit Varma]: of the arc of this relationship as regards to border differences. And, you know, the possible
[Amit Varma]: reasons that it's kind of exploded, you know, in phases over the last decade, like really coming
[Guest]: to a head last year, of course, in Ladakh. Yeah, the border issues and the perimeters
[Guest]: issue and I call it perimeters just to stay with the peas. But it's an interesting one,
[Guest]: because I think we've lost track of that it began as a cooperative venture. So definitely,
[Guest]: the two sides did begin a process of negotiation and talks. And it seemed to go fairly well for
[Guest]: about four or five years until about 1954. And the issue of of the border cannot be divorced
[Guest]: from Tibet. Because obviously, Tibet is where India meets China. And so it was intimately
[Guest]: connected with the status of Tibet as well. And again, the first four or five years brought
[Guest]: cooperation on Tibet. India conceded that China basically owned Tibet, and concluded a treaty in
[Guest]: 1954, and backed a certain agreement that the Chinese had with the Tibetans in 1950-51 as well.
[Guest]: So it began well, you know, one might have expected that things would get better. And that
[Guest]: was belied, obviously. And what I try to show in the book is as balanced in as balanced a way as
[Guest]: possible, is that, in a sense, I mean, it wasn't maliciousness, and it wasn't point scoring. And
[Guest]: it wasn't, you know, a desire altogether to hurt the other side. In those initial years,
[Guest]: I pointed out that there was a kind of a split in the negotiating stance that they had. There was
[Guest]: the so called sooner school, my term, and the later school on both sides. So my grandfather,
[Guest]: Girija Bajpai, and KPS Menon, Shivshankar Menon's grandfather as well, they were two of the senior
[Guest]: most foreign service people. And they were in the, with Sardar Patel, they were in the sooner school,
[Guest]: negotiate with China, because the Chinese are going to raise the border issue, and twin an
[Guest]: agreement of the border to the status of Tibet. We will agree to Chinese kind of sovereignty over
[Guest]: Tibet, if they come to an accommodation on the border. But Panekar, who was our ambassador,
[Guest]: the historian, geopolitical thinker, who was our ambassador in Beijing, he was of the later school,
[Guest]: he said, don't raise the border issue, because we won't agree, and then be reforced to negotiate.
[Guest]: And we don't want to negotiate, because in some ways, our position in administrative control in
[Guest]: the furthest reaches, particularly in NIFA, which is Arunachal Pradesh today, is very weak. So we've
[Guest]: got to buy time. It'll come, but let's, let's wait for the Chinese to raise it. And Nehru kind of
[Guest]: oscillated between the two, and then eventually came out on the side of Panekar. And the Chinese,
[Guest]: you see, I think, and I tried to show, had exactly the same debate. Their Tibetologists and their
[Guest]: cartographers came to the view that China, that the Indians were not playing fair, the Chinese had
[Guest]: a case, and they should raise it sooner rather than later. And the politicos, that is Zhou Enlai
[Guest]: and Mao and others in the Communist Party felt that the time wasn't right, that China was too
[Guest]: weak. And they would deal with India later on this matter, and not provoke. So the first five years,
[Guest]: from 1949 to 1954, they were both tiptoeing around the issue, both kind of expecting to join the
[Guest]: issue at some point. And probably, you know, they were still fairly friendly, rhetorically, and so
[Guest]: on. And an accommodation might have been reached, but it wasn't. And then things got worse and worse.
[Guest]: And, but when they did begin to talk, and then I'll roll the movie forward faster. When they did
[Guest]: begin to talk in about 1954, both sides did things or said things that could be prone to
[Guest]: misinterpretation by the other side. You know, Nehru insisted on issuing some maps where Aksai
[Guest]: Chin seemed to be very much within our territory. And he did this just around the time of a meeting
[Guest]: with Zhou Enlai. Zhou Enlai didn't take umbrage. But as soon as he went back, the Chinese began to
[Guest]: issue maps of their own that contradicted that claim. And when India objected, the Chinese said,
[Guest]: oh, no, no, these are the old Go Min Dang maps, give us time. So we did stuff with maps that they
[Guest]: didn't, that caused suspicion amongst them. They did stuff with maps that we thought was dishonest
[Guest]: as well. Nehru was not even sure that we really had a strong case on Aksai Chin. And some of his
[Guest]: advisors also didn't think so. It was really only when S. Gopal, the historian, went to Britain
[Guest]: and looked at the archives there and came back that India began to feel that it had a much
[Guest]: stronger case on Aksai Chin. And Nehru began to make much stronger statements publicly about
[Guest]: owning Aksai Chin. And the Chinese went through something similar. Their records also had been
[Guest]: disrupted by the Civil War. At least that's a thought experiment that I do. Some records may
[Guest]: have gone to Taipei, you know, when the Go Min Dang ran away with all those documents. Some may
[Guest]: have been destroyed in the Civil War. So they had to reconstruct their stance as well. So, you know,
[Guest]: I give both sides a long rope, in effect, saying let's not jump to this conclusion on both sides
[Guest]: that the other was thoroughly dishonest and trying to outpoint the other. There were genuine
[Guest]: administrative, political doubts, worries, weaknesses. They had come out, both had come
[Guest]: out of a Civil War. In India, the Civil War was Congress Party and Muslim League. In China,
[Guest]: it was Go Min Dang Communist Party, which is a literal Civil War. They had both come out of a
[Guest]: partition. After all, the creation of Taiwan is a partition. And Hong Kong was still there,
[Guest]: and Macau was still separate. They had both come out of a world war. They briefly fought on the
[Guest]: same side against the Japanese, but they both came out of a chaos of a world war, the Chinese
[Guest]: particularly, because they were occupied. We were not occupied. They both came out of a period of
[Guest]: war. We were fighting the Pakistanis in 47, 48. They were fighting the Americans and South Koreans
[Guest]: in Korea. Both were confronting the Cold War. So, you know, it's quite forgivable that they
[Guest]: didn't know their minds altogether about the border themselves, each other, etc., etc. You
[Guest]: know, so let's be a bit more forgiving of both sides and not jump to the conclusion they just
[Guest]: wanted to screw each other. And that's what I tried to reconstruct. But of course, they also
[Guest]: did, unfortunately, read each other in a negative light. What might have been innocent
[Guest]: prevarications, contradictions, hesitations, was seen as the other side as you're trying to screw
[Guest]: me and being dishonest with me and fooling me. So not surprisingly, things increasingly fell apart.
[Guest]: And that brings us to the swap, which I suppose was the last great moment when things could have
[Guest]: been salvaged. And it's true the Chinese under Zhou Enlai, when he came for that fateful summit
[Guest]: in 1960 to Delhi, the Indians already knew that he was bringing a proposal like that.
[Guest]: They weren't stupid. And this whole idea that Nehru and his advisor were naive, here was Chacha
[Guest]: Nehru in his kind of slightly indulgent, benighted, faltering, foolish way. You know, he knew from
[Guest]: the beginning, thanks to Panicker, that there was a problem. Thanks to G.S. Bajpai, thanks to Patel.
[Guest]: The letter that Patel wrote in 1950, just before he died to Nehru, alerting him, was written by
[Guest]: my grandfather, the draft, and then Patel played around with it and sent it off. They were not
[Guest]: naive at all. But, you know, there were other considerations. Anyway, Zhou Enlai arrives in
[Guest]: Delhi, as the Indians expected, with the proposal. But Nehru and his advisors already had lost courage.
[Guest]: Nehru said famously, which I quote in the book, if I go for the swap, I will not survive as a
[Guest]: prime minister. And who are the people who would have been his biggest critics? The right-wing
[Guest]: critics in his own party, and the right-wing critics outside his party, the Jansang and others,
[Guest]: but also perhaps the Swatantra party of Raja Gopalacharian, who were more America-inclined.
[Guest]: And they turned out to be formidable forces, as Ram Guha shows in his work on this period. So
[Guest]: they very quickly basically shut Zhou Enlai down. And, you know, they had reasons. It wasn't just
[Guest]: the domestic political sphere. They had concerns of, as I think R.K. Nehru said, or was it B.K.
[Guest]: Nehru at that time? I forget. I'm forgetting my own book here. And the foreign secretary of the
[Guest]: time was saying, you know, in 1960, that if we give in to the Chinese now, under pressure,
[Guest]: because border incidents were already occurring, what's to stop the Chinese learning the lesson
[Guest]: that if you push the Indians militarily, they will give again? So we get a swap. And then they go,
[Guest]: oh, no, we actually forgot we want some more territory. And then there's another set of
[Guest]: border incidents. And they would be the expectation that the Indians would cave in again.
[Guest]: And they also concluded that Zhou Enlai had never put anything down on paper. So this was a kind of
[Guest]: chatty proposal. And what was really the, would Mao go for it? Were there other forces? Or was
[Guest]: this more or less a good-natured proposal by Zhou Enlai, slightly intended to smoke the Indians out
[Guest]: and buy time? So there are all kinds of reasons that India could worry about the status of the
[Guest]: proposals. I mean, the Chinese concluded from this episode that the Indians were simply not willing
[Guest]: to, A, enter into discussion seriously, you're not going for a reasonable proposal, they were
[Guest]: imperialists, they wanted to take over Tibet, etc, etc. And you just couldn't do business with
[Guest]: them. Even so, there was still some attempts to try and deal with it. But it collapsed, partly
[Guest]: with these military moves that occurred. And so, you know, the chapter shows that one period of
[Guest]: proto-cooperation through a collapse into war, peaking in 62, occurred. And just to take very
[Guest]: quickly the story forward, after 62, we go through almost a similar arc. Again, almost immediately
[Guest]: in 63-64, India sends out messages to try and get some talks going again. It has a certain amount of
[Guest]: receptivity, an arc of cooperation begins, and it does well until a much longer timescale here,
[Guest]: right up to about, I would say, the early 2000s. Maybe 2006 is the turning point when the Chinese
[Guest]: ambassador in Delhi, very publicly at that time, says, by the way, we own all of Arunachal Pradesh,
[Guest]: so please, you Indians, don't forget it. And there was consternation because we hadn't heard that
[Guest]: kind of blunt statement for the Chinese for a long time. And from 2006 onwards, then, you can see a
[Guest]: deterioration in the relationship. By 2010, India, perhaps in reaction, stops making fulsome
[Guest]: statements in the joint statements that, you know, happened with summits about, oh, yeah, yeah,
[Guest]: Tibet is yours. And so we stopped doing that. They keep insisting Arunachal is theirs. I mean,
[Guest]: of course, they'd said it earlier, but there was a long period of time where they stopped insisting
[Guest]: on it very publicly. That's 2010. 2013, we're almost back to where we are now. You have the
[Guest]: Depsang Plains incident when Manmohan Singh is in his last year. That occurs just as Li Keqiang,
[Guest]: the current premier, is coming to meet Manmohan Singh. 2014 is Chumar. Modi and Xi are sitting
[Guest]: on a jhoola in Gandhinagar, and the troops are faced off in Chumar. 2015 is Burtsey. And this
[Guest]: is an episode that people have sort of forgotten. I don't know why the Indian media has largely
[Guest]: forgotten it. And so 2013, 14, 15, annually, there are these fracases or confrontation.
[Guest]: 2017 is Doklam, 73 days of staring each other in the face. And 2020 is Ladakh,
[Guest]: back in the eastern sector with Chumar, Depsang, and Burtsey. So that's the arc.
[Guest]: So we didn't end up in the 1962 war. We ended up in Ladakh 2020. It's an arc of cooperation
[Guest]: through attempts to settle the issue. There were very thorough border talks from 1981 onwards. We
[Guest]: never stopped negotiating on the border after 1981, which people forget. But again, it degraded,
[Guest]: and we went into near war in 2020. In 62, we went into war. So, you know, it's an odd thing that
[Guest]: we've had two repeat cycles. And at the heart of it, I mean, I don't know exactly what the answer
[Guest]: is, but fundamentally, there's an issue of trust there, which is a tautology, right? You don't
[Guest]: cooperate because you don't trust, and you don't trust because you don't have a history of
[Guest]: cooperation. So then, I mean, tautology is useful, because they make us ask, well, why don't you
[Guest]: trust? How can I break out of this tautology? And here, I would just end with some thoughts,
[Guest]: which is they're unprovable, but they're up for discussion, which is the political cultures of
[Guest]: the two sides, really, in a sense. You've got liberal India working in constitutional ways,
[Guest]: taking constitutional ways from the British, and that whole mindset from internal negotiations to
[Guest]: external negotiations of a certain kind. You know, they're settled borders by treaty and customary
[Guest]: understandings, and that's how you deal with the problem with China. That's Nehru. Whereas the
[Guest]: Chinese, they're two revolutionaries there, hard-bitten, cold-eyed men who went through
[Guest]: cataclysmic total warfare. They are deal-makers. They're strategic-minded people. They think that
[Guest]: the liberal adornments of law and constitution and all of that is some bourgeois idea, which
[Guest]: is supposed to mask reality. After all, what does the middle class do and the capitalists?
[Guest]: They pretend to give you all these freedoms and protections of the law to make sure that they
[Guest]: actually come out on top. So they looked at this whole insistence on constitutionalism and
[Guest]: negotiation and insistence on rule of law and treaties as trying to fool the Chinese.
[Guest]: So, you know, they just couldn't quite comprehend where Nehru was coming from,
[Guest]: and likewise, the Nehruvians thought that they were dishonest. And then, as I said,
[Guest]: all these hesitations and cartographic kind of weaknesses that they had made each suspicious
[Guest]: of the other. Both sides, ironically, were weak states, and weak states find it difficult
[Guest]: to cooperate with each other because they can't convince the other that their moves are, you know.
[Guest]: Then there's history. The two countries I try and point out, or the two civilizations,
[Guest]: their two heartlands never had a very rich diplomatic history. They traded, monks went back
[Guest]: and forth, et cetera, et cetera. But empire to empire, they didn't have a long history of knowing
[Guest]: each other's ways, which could see them through. And what do they get from that history? They get
[Guest]: predictability of how the other, but most important, they learn a lesson about does the other
[Guest]: side keep to commitments, i.e. promises. If you feel the other side keeps to promises, then you
[Guest]: might begin to think, okay, if we did a stucco deal, they'll honor it. And the last point is,
[Guest]: where does trust come from? It comes from, you know, if you're part of the same civilization
[Guest]: or culture, you have a certain kind of sense of, I understand where you're coming from,
[Guest]: we come from the same place kind of stuff. But for all that, China and India, you know,
[Guest]: don't come from that place. They don't have that assurance, that immersion in a common culture.
[Guest]: And so I think, you know, those are some reasons that they just, there was a lack of trust. And
[Guest]: to some extent, all that continues to be the case. So your other two P's, of course, are about like,
[Amit Varma]: one is about partnerships, which is about how geopolitical considerations have kind of kept
[Amit Varma]: them on the opposite side with, you know, India will first go with Russia and then with the US
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, and all of these things ensure that they never end up on the same side. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: basically, like you pointed out, they're on the same side only once, which is in the Second World
[Amit Varma]: War. Otherwise, they're never on the same side of a conflict. And your final chapter on power is
[Amit Varma]: about the great power imbalance, where China has become a much more powerful country. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: China is saying we will not give any concessions because we are much more powerful. And India,
[Amit Varma]: which recognizes that it is not as powerful, but it aspires to be, will say we will not make any
[Amit Varma]: more concessions because you know, all kinds of reasons it looks bad. And, you know, what would
[Amit Varma]: our voters say and all of that. I'll direct listeners to go and just buy the book and read
[Amit Varma]: it because it's a fantastic one sitting read. And really, I don't think we'll do justice to it if we
[Amit Varma]: try to really summarize it. But I'll end with a couple of final questions. And one of them is this
[Amit Varma]: that it seems to me that post 1950s, what has happened to our relationship is almost like this
[Amit Varma]: great tragedy where both countries for various reasons, various reasons which are rational and
[Amit Varma]: understandable, have somehow gotten locked into this antagonistic relationship, where it has become
[Amit Varma]: impossible to trust the other side, again, for good reasons. It's not as if there are any bad
[Amit Varma]: actors in this, but it becomes impossible to trust the other side, and which led to that one eruption
[Amit Varma]: of the 62 conflict. But what has happened since then, is that both sides seem to have recognized
[Amit Varma]: that this is, you know, let's make a stable equilibrium out of this and not enter into any
[Amit Varma]: more skirmishes because war after all is a negative sum game and blah, blah, blah. So let's just ignore
[Amit Varma]: the problem. And we'll make occasional noises and we'll posture occasionally, but we won't actually
[Amit Varma]: do anything against each other. And let's just keep it as it is. And it's it kind of stays that
[Amit Varma]: way for decades. And yet over the last few years, it seems to have exploded into a different kind
[Amit Varma]: of place where the Chinese clearly want something and these these border disputes don't just seem
[Amit Varma]: to be about borders because, you know, I mean, these are, you know, Siachen is important for
[Amit Varma]: India, Aksaichen is important for China, but they're not that important that you risk a full
[Amit Varma]: fledged war or that you break this equilibrium. Also, the danger here is we enter a vicious cycle
[Amit Varma]: where we have jingoism on one side met by jingoism on the other side, and it just escalates and
[Amit Varma]: becomes worse and worse. So the first of my two questions is that why is this happening? Why the
[Amit Varma]: sudden belligerence from them? Why have they kind of upped the game? What are the kind of
[Amit Varma]: competing theories and what seems most plausible to you?
[Guest]: Well, I'll go back to these four Ps, I want to investigate all four. But I think
[Guest]: that, you know, in search of a fairly simple answer, I would go for the simplest, which is that
[Guest]: it's the perimeters of Tibet, which is the Chinese built a lot of infrastructure in Tibet, which is
[Guest]: relatively easy to do, because it's a plateau. And they did massive amounts of building there
[Guest]: in the late 90s, early 2000s. India then alarmed by this suddenly started to get going on building
[Guest]: its own infrastructure under the Manmohan Singh government first, a little bit under Vajpayee,
[Guest]: and then again, with Modi. So all three governments have played their role in pushing
[Guest]: or playing catch up. The difficulty on the Indian side is that our roads are twisting turning. We're
[Guest]: going from the plains up in straight up into these massive hills. So our road building and
[Guest]: infrastructure is much more difficult to do. And so it's not surprising that it's slower. I mean,
[Guest]: there are other reasons too, we were reluctant to build it earlier, and so on and so forth. But
[Guest]: so we've slowly started to catch up. We've rehabilitated some in our flatlands in Aksai
[Guest]: Chin. We've rehabilitated some of the airfields going back to an earlier time, excuse me. And
[Guest]: that has alarmed the Chinese, as we've caught up. Now, we can say it's unfair, because they did
[Guest]: their infrastructure first. Why should they object to ours? But this is a strategic issue. There's
[Guest]: no fairness issue here. This is again, you know, we're talking the fairness game. They're talking
[Guest]: a strategic picture. And to understand what's strategic about it, which again, we don't
[Guest]: appreciate enough, probably on our side is, and I've been saying this in some of the other talks
[Guest]: is, when you think the border issue, when you think conflict with China, please think Tibet.
[Guest]: They are so super sensitive about Tibet, in a way that we don't appreciate. You know, we think that,
[Guest]: oh, we did that deal back in 54, that they should be happy with it. And that's the end of the story.
[Guest]: No, there was a rebellion in Tibet after that, that they accused us of fostering and working
[Guest]: with the Americans. And there's evidence that certainly the Americans very much pushed it.
[Guest]: But beyond that, when you build these roads and infrastructure, I mean, they're reading that as
[Guest]: not a defensive move, but potentially a move into Aksai Chin to again, endanger their road
[Guest]: from Xinjiang down into Tibet, and to potentially at a moment of internal instability in Tibet.
[Guest]: And I'll come to that in a minute, that India could play a role then. I mean, maybe not invade
[Guest]: and take over, but cause significant trouble at the border, and send a message to rebellions
[Guest]: within Tibet, which then the Chinese would have difficulty handling. So I think that's the thing
[Guest]: that we have to keep in mind on the Indian side. And we're going into a dangerous period. So it's
[Guest]: not just the roads per se, it's that for China, we're going into a dangerous period for them.
[Guest]: What's that danger? Well, the Dalai Lama is a wonderful person, and I hope he lives for a very
[Guest]: long time. But we know we're entering a period of transition. And he will depart this world,
[Guest]: sadly, at some point. And then where are we? The Chinese will put up their successor.
[Guest]: The overseas Chinese community, including very powerfully in India, will want to do their own
[Guest]: succession planning and process. There may be Tibet diasporic communities in the West who will
[Guest]: do their own search, which would not agree with either of the other two searches. So one can
[Guest]: imagine a very difficult time if you put yourself in the place of Beijing. And strategic thinking,
[Guest]: you have to think about how your adversary thinks about problems. So they can see a political
[Guest]: strategic problem arising in the next 10, 15 years, perhaps sooner, where the Tibet issue boils up,
[Guest]: the Indians have completed their infrastructure and are much more able to intervene or cause
[Guest]: trouble at the border, coincident with an internal rebellion and uncertainties.
[Guest]: And it may be that they would be generous towards us and say, whoever's ruling in Delhi would not
[Guest]: deliberately stoke the problem, but would an Indian ruler, given public opinion in India,
[Guest]: be able to handle the fallout of the succession and what it would mean with China? So from every
[Guest]: point of view, they would be extremely worried about the Tibet problem. And that's the issue,
[Guest]: you know, I think, which is that it's a bit incomprehensible to us that they're so substantially
[Guest]: in charge of Tibet and all of that. What are they worried about? Why do they worry about the border?
[Guest]: We can't invade them, et cetera. And as you said, the slices of territory that might be involved,
[Guest]: barring Arunachal Pradesh, seem to be very small. But there's Tibet. There's their worry about
[Guest]: Tibet. And this, I think, is the problem. And it's almost like a structural historical moment
[Guest]: or a conjuncture that we've reached of the fatality of human beings, that the Dalai will
[Guest]: leave this world, sadly, current Dalai Lama, and a decision has to be made about the future of
[Guest]: Buddhism in Tibet and the governing arrangements, et cetera, et cetera. And the fatal problem,
[Guest]: fatal meaning, it's out of our hands that there's a Tibetan community here who will want to have a
[Guest]: say. Beijing can't do anything about that existential reality. Delhi can't do anything
[Guest]: about it. We're not going to force out the Tibetans. We're not going to put all the Tibetans
[Guest]: in jail so we can avoid a problem with the Chinese. The Chinese can't do something about
[Guest]: the Tibetans in India beyond a point, et cetera, et cetera. So I think it's a real difficulty. And
[Guest]: that may account for the very serious kind of problem that occurred last year. And you can see
[Guest]: 2013, 2014, 2015, all in eastern Ladakh. 2017 is a bit different, but that's a different part of
[Guest]: Tibet. It's still Tibet. And by the way, the problem is in eastern Ladakh. But going back to
[Guest]: 62, Mao took a decision to hit India hardest in Nipah, in Arunachal, where India was probably
[Guest]: strongest militarily because he wanted to make the point that if we're going to hit India, we're
[Guest]: going to teach them a lesson. You can't do it where they're weak because they'll find excuses
[Guest]: saying, oh, they beat us up where we're weak. No, we're going to beat you up where you're strong
[Guest]: to really make the point that we are angry with you. So this may be, again, the problem.
[Guest]: And the further issue is that they lay strong claim now as they didn't as much back in the 60s
[Guest]: to Arunachal. They may see economic resources in Arunachal that they didn't earlier, river waters,
[Guest]: agricultural lands, minerals, and all of that, timber. And it's symbolically important because
[Guest]: coming back to Tibet, Tawang Monastery, that's there. They want it. We can't give it to them.
[Guest]: When the next Dalai comes, it will be in the mix of things that might play a role.
[Guest]: So Arunachal is important from that point of view as well. And lastly, where are their main
[Guest]: military headquarters? They're near Arunachal Pradesh. I mean, Lhasa and all of that is near,
[Guest]: it's not in Ladakh. They're not in eastern Ladakh. So the command headquarters are in Chengdu
[Guest]: and neighboring areas like that. They only have one big command center, and that's in Hotan
[Guest]: in Xinjiang, and that's quite a distance away from eastern Ladakh. So I mean, a common sense
[Guest]: of prediction would be that if there is a problem, we could have a very serious problem in Arunachal
[Guest]: Pradesh, because that's where their military strength and command strength is.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I'll cheat. Before asking my last question, I'll ask a follow up question to this.
[Amit Varma]: You've been so patient with me, my God. So, and here's a follow up question. The stakes are huge,
[Amit Varma]: right? If you look at it as a negative sum game, as all conflict inevitably is, it can get just
[Amit Varma]: much worse and worse. And it doesn't matter how bad it gets for China, it'll get much worse for
[Amit Varma]: us, and we don't want conflict. And the positive sum game of cooperation and trade and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: the benefits are also incredibly huge. So now the question is that, what should India do now?
[Amit Varma]: Like, going by this analysis, that this is a problem, these are their worries,
[Amit Varma]: there's historically been distrust, let's resolve it once and for all. And let's kind of move ahead
[Amit Varma]: and let's do what it takes to resolve it. What should India do now?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, having said all this stuff so passionately,
[Guest]: and you put me on the spot, which is a difficult one for academics, particularly, but fair enough.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, the book doesn't answer the question, really. So, because I got cowardly,
[Amit Varma]: and I ran out of energy and time. You were more foxy than Fedgehoggy with this.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly. Thanks. You put me in my place there, anyway. But I guess that for me, ultimately,
[Guest]: at this point, I would say, there has to be a thorough excavation domestically on both sides.
[Guest]: And I think that, unfortunately, you know, on the Chinese side, even if it happens,
[Guest]: we're not going to see it, because they don't do that kind of stuff. They don't open up in
[Guest]: their system domestically, let it all hang out, and warts and all, you see their debate and
[Guest]: their mayor culpers. But we can still do it, because we're still open enough, you know, and
[Guest]: we still have a bit of a political culture, I would say, where we could open it up.
[Guest]: So, I think that, you know, this is a difficult question. But probably, for me, the answer is that
[Guest]: Beijing and China are not going to carry out this internal, somewhat public discussion,
[Guest]: which is probably necessary. I mean, they may do it internally, and it could be effective.
[Guest]: But in a sense, it can still happen in India more easily, given our relatively open system. And so,
[Guest]: you know, it takes courage. But I think India has to begin to vent, to open, to excavate,
[Guest]: to take a risk, to open up its archives more. Maybe some things can't altogether be opened up.
[Guest]: But I see a kind of opening up already happening. I mean, you know, there have been some very
[Guest]: interesting books just recently, Zorawar Dholat Singh's book. I know you interviewed, I think,
[Guest]: Anand Krishnan, perhaps.
[Amit Varma]: I haven't spoken to Anand, but I've spoken to Manoj Kevalramani on his book, Smokeless War.
[Guest]: Right, Manoj's work, which I don't know yet, actually. And so, I must read that. Thanks for
[Guest]: alerting me to it again. I know there are at least a couple of Indian diplomats, who are very soon
[Guest]: going to come out with books. They're China, you know, at least three of them, very, very high
[Guest]: ranking in diplomats. I'm not going to mention their names, because I don't think it's my
[Guest]: call to mention it, when they still haven't come out very openly. But I know, you know,
[Guest]: in a way, through them, we are beginning to open it out in a way that we haven't done for a very
[Guest]: long time. And so, I'm kind of still hopeful that these books will start to open it out. And if my
[Guest]: book also plays a bit of a role there, you know, in just provoking people, then I think that'll be
[Guest]: mission accomplished. So, I think there's hope there. And this government and Shivshankar Menon
[Guest]: and Manmohan Singh also began to open up the Indian archives. So, I think that, you know,
[Guest]: both these last two governments have played a role in encouraging that. And I think
[Guest]: Foreign Minister Jaishankar and Modi himself, to their credit, I think are sticking with it.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think that's what's got to happen. If out of that debate, then, you know, you see,
[Guest]: then it's not just Modi taking a case to the country. There's a whole range of people who
[Guest]: will begin to open things up, talks like this and other settings. The Indian elite and middle class
[Guest]: will begin to access these debates. So, by the time a Modi or his successor comes to really sort
[Guest]: of go back to China with a possible deal, they will already be a kind of civic society support
[Guest]: base, which will say, all right, we're kind of ready. And I think that maybe already,
[Guest]: barring some real fanatics here and there, there is a willingness now in India to kind of revisit
[Guest]: the whole thing. On the Chinese side too, I think there are constituencies there. But I think it
[Guest]: probably take India to kickstart it at this point. I know that's a hard one for us to swallow on,
[Guest]: because we think we've been wronged very badly by China, including last year. But from the spirit
[Guest]: of your question, leaving aside, you know, this episode and that episode, and who was at fault
[Guest]: altogether, do we fundamentally want a resolution of this issue so that we can all move forward and
[Guest]: deal with other problems? I think from that much bigger strategic perspective, I think we will have
[Guest]: to take the lead in opening this up. Fascinating. I mean, I obviously don't know India-China
[Amit Varma]: relations remotely, as well as experts like you do. But I do know that there is a willingness
[Amit Varma]: to take India-China relations remotely, as well as experts like you do. But from the little that
[Amit Varma]: I know of Indian politics, somehow I'm a little less hopeful than you are. My final question is
[Amit Varma]: this, given that the stakes are so high, a lot can happen suddenly, you know, the world can change in
[Amit Varma]: a week, as it were. If I ask you to look forward to say 2030, in the context of India-China
[Amit Varma]: relations, what's the best case scenario? And what's the worst case scenario?
[Guest]: Well, the best case is kind of this increasing internal debate that, which, in a sense,
[Guest]: was catalyzed by the events of last year. So, if one could put it that way, the Chinese may have
[Guest]: done us a favor by that. They may have catalyzed an internal debate that will culminate by 2030
[Guest]: in new perspectives in India. And, you know, I mean, I can't say I'm a big fan of this government,
[Guest]: but the chances are that Mr. Modi or a successor will be re-elected. And if they come back fairly
[Guest]: strongly, they might be able to take this change that is in motion in India. And it may be that,
[Guest]: if it's Mr. Modi himself, that he would see that as part of a legacy, you know. So, to personalize
[Guest]: the possibility, maybe that's the way it'll work out, is that he would take it forward. And by that
[Guest]: time, who knows, Xi Jinping may also be looking at a legacy issue. And they decide to go for it, and
[Guest]: it works. And we have catalyzed the debate enough internally that there'll be enough support for
[Guest]: a Modi at that point. And so, we get an agreement. Does that mean all quarrels will be over? No,
[Guest]: but it means that at least this big one will be over, and then we can see whether we can adjust
[Guest]: other matters between us. The worst case is, of course, that, you know, that doesn't happen,
[Guest]: and things get worse. And the Chinese, you know, going back to what you paraphrased nicely for me,
[Guest]: just the gap between the two countries either remains substantially like this or gets worse.
[Guest]: And if that happens, then the Chinese would be even less prone to concede to anything to us,
[Guest]: and we would find it even more difficult to, you know, do a deal which wouldn't look like a
[Guest]: surrender. And who knows? I mean, our nationalists, super nationalists, and their super nationalists
[Guest]: might just, it might all explode. India might drift closer and closer to the United States to
[Guest]: compensate for that power gap, which will antagonize the Chinese even more. The Chinese
[Guest]: will overread it, and something will happen here or there on the border, and we could get into a
[Guest]: serious problem. What might salvage it for India, of course, is that despite the disparity in power,
[Guest]: geography, the Himalayas, and so on, will still play a role as a stopping factor. And, you know,
[Guest]: it may be another stalemate, but it could be, if any, it could be a little war again. I mean,
[Guest]: the optimistic part of that is 1962 war, we think of it as one month long, but it's actually only
[Guest]: 11 days of fighting in two phases. And really, for such a massive border, sad as any casualties
[Guest]: are, the casualties were relatively low in the history of warfare. And that's probably going to
[Guest]: be the case again, it seems to me, you know, unless people lose their heads completely on both
[Guest]: sides. So I think that's the worst case scenario, that we do actually go beyond what happened last
[Guest]: summer to an actual fight, maybe mostly centered on the eastern sector. And that would be, you know,
[Guest]: unpredictable exactly where it would go. But again, it would make the problem worse for another
[Guest]: 2030 years. Yeah. And if other countries get drawn into it, to some extent, then it affects Asia,
[Guest]: it has Asia-wide ramifications. But I still remain somewhat optimistic that the events of, oddly
[Guest]: enough, of last year may have catalyzed something, particularly on the Indian side, who knows how
[Guest]: much on the Chinese side, and out of this something positive may come. And we could now, one last
[Guest]: thought on again, to personalize it, both Xi and Modi have shown that they can make dramatic moves,
[Guest]: either in their internal politics or externally. In India, you know, demonetization, GST, you know,
[Guest]: certain kinds of other decisions that have been taken. One day, Modi flies to Pakistan to make
[Guest]: peace in 2015. The next day, we do Balakot or whatever, you know, provoked by the Pakistanis.
[Guest]: One day, there's Doklam. The next day, Modi is meeting Xi Jinping in Wuhan and then Mamlapuram.
[Guest]: The Chinese, likewise, do all kinds of, one day is full four-year diplomacy. The next day, Xi Jinping
[Guest]: is telling his diplomats, can you please ease back and use less harsh language and be nice,
[Guest]: play nice. So, you know, we could see a dramatic reversal to Wuhan, the spirit of Wuhan and
[Guest]: Mamlapuram at a moment. And you know, we have ambivalences about the relationship with the
[Guest]: Americans. So, you never know, it might turn on these leaders suddenly making a switch strategically.
[Amit Varma]: I'm struck by the fact that even in your worst case scenario, it doesn't get too bad because
[Amit Varma]: of geography, as H.P. Lovecraft himself might have put it, the mountains of madness save Chinese
[Amit Varma]: tentacles from entering Indian arteries. And, you know, but I'm also struck by the fact that some of
[Amit Varma]: the hope comes from the possibility of small men looking for big legacies. So, who knows what will
[Amit Varma]: happen. But, you know, I've learned so much by reading your book. I've learned so much by talking
[Amit Varma]: to you for almost four hours today. So, thank you so much, Kanti, for your time and insights.
[Guest]: Thank you very much. It's been a wonderful tour. I must say, revisiting my own life and
[Guest]: learning from you. And I thoroughly enjoyed it. And thanks for talking about the book as well.
[Amit Varma]: It's a wonderful forum that you have here.
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai